2. BASIC METHODS OF SIMPLE RANDOM SAMPLING
"To this end was I born for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth . .. Pilate saith unto him 'What is truth?'"
St. John
2.1 SIMPLE RANDOM SAMPLING
The simplest and common most method of sampling is simple random sampling in which the sample is drawn unit by unit, with equal probability of selection for each unit at each draw. Therefore, simple random sampling is a method of selecting  units out of a population of size  by giving equal probability to all units, or a sampling procedure in which all possible combinations of  units that may be formed from the population of  units have the same probability of selection. It is also sometimes referred to as unrestricted random sampling. If a unit is selected and noted and then returned to the population before the next drawing is made and this procedure repeated  times, it gives rise to a simple random sample of  units. This procedure is generally known as simple random sampling with replacement (wr). If this procedure is repeated till  distinct units are selected and all repetitions are ignored, it is called a simple random sampling without replacement (wor).
Theorem 2.1.1: The probability that a specified unit of the population being selected at any given draw is equal to the probability of its being selected at the first draw.
Proof: The probability that the specified unit is selected at the th draw is clearly the product of (a) the probability that the specified unit is not selected in any of the previous  draws, and (b) the probability that it is selected at the th draw with the condition that it is not selected in the previous  draws.
The probability under (a), is given by

The probability under (b) is given by . Hence the required probability is  which is independent of the term , i.e. draw number.
Theorem 2.1.2: The probability of a specified unit being included in the sample is equal to .
Proof: Let  denote the sample size. Since the specified unit may be included in the sample at any of the  draws, the probability that a specified unit is included in the sample is the sum of the probabilities of  mutually exclusive events, viz. it is included in the sample at the first draw, second draw, ..., th draw. As shown in Theorem 2.1.1 the probability of each case is . Thus the required probability is .
Corollary 1: The probability of a specified sample of  units, ignoring order, is .
Corollary 2: If in the population of  units,  units are deleted and  are added, show that the probability of selection of any unit at a specified draw is .
2.2 PROCEDURES OF SELECTING A RANDOM SAMPLE
Since the theory of sampling is based on the assumption of random sampling, the technique of random sampling is of basic significance. Some of the procedures used for selecting a random sample are as follows:
(i) Lottery Method
(ii) Use of Random Number Tables
2.2.1 Lottery Method
In practice, a ticket/chit may be associated with each unit of the population. Thus, each sampling unit has its identification mark from 1 to . The procedure of selecting an individual is simple. All the tickets/chits are placed in a container, drum or metallic spherical device, in which a thorough mixing or reshuffling is possible, before each draw. Draws of tickets/chits may be continued until a sample of the required size is obtained.
This procedure of numbering units on tickets/chits and selecting one after reshuffling becomes cumbersome when the population size is large. It may be rather difficult to achieve a thorough shuffling in practice. Human bias and prejudice may also creep in this method.
2.2.2 Use of Random Number Tables
A random number table is an arrangement of digits 0 to 9, in either a linear or rectangular pattern, where each position is filled with one of these digits. A table of random numbers is so constructed that all numbers, 0, 1, 2, ..., 9, appear independent of each other. Some random number tables in common use are:
(i) Tippett's random number tables
(ii) Fisher and Yates tables
(iii) Kendall and Smith tables
(iv) A million random digits
To ascertain whether these series of random numbers are really random, the following tests may be applied:
(i) Frequency test
(ii) Serial test
(iii) Gap test
(iv) Poker test
A practical method of selecting a random sample is to choose units one-by-one with the help of a table of random numbers. By considering two-digit numbers, we can obtain numbers from 00 to 99, all having the same frequency. Similarly, three or more digit numbers may be obtained by combining three or more rows or columns of these tables.
The simplest way of selecting a sample of the required size is by selecting a random number from 1 to  and then taking the unit bearing that number. This procedure involves a number of rejections since all numbers greater than  appearing in the table are not considered for selection. The use of random numbers is, therefore, modified and some of these modified procedures are:
(i) Remainder approach
(ii) Quotient approach
(iii) Independent choice of digits
Remainder Approach
Let  be an -digit number and let its -digit highest multiple be . A random number  is chosen from 1 to  and the unit with the serial number equal to the remainder obtained on dividing  by  is selected. If the remainder is zero, the last unit is selected. As an illustration, let , the highest three-digit multiple of 123 is 984. For selecting a unit, one random number from 001 to 984 has to be selected. Let the random number selected be 287. Dividing 287 by 123, the remainder is 41. Hence, the unit with serial number 41 is selected in the sample.
Quotient Approach
Let  be an -digit number and let its -digit highest multiple be  such that . A random number  is chosen from 0 to . Dividing  by  the quotient  is obtained and the unit bearing the serial number  is selected in the sample. As an illustration, let  and hence  and . Let the two-digit random number chosen be 65 which lies between 0 and 95. Dividing 65 by 6, the quotient is 10 and hence the unit bearing number  is selected in the sample.
Independent Choice of Digits
This method, suggested by Mathai (1954), consists of the selection of two random numbers which are combined to form one random number. One random number is chosen according to the first digit and other according to the remaining digits of the population size. If the number chosen is 0 the last unit is chosen. But if the number made up is greater than or equal to , the number is rejected and the operation is repeated.
Example 2.1: Select a random sample of 11 households from a list of 112 households in a village.
(i) By using the 3-digit random numbers given in columns 1 to 3, 4 to 6 and so on of the random number table and rejecting numbers greater than 112 (also the number 000), we have for the sample bearing serial numbers 033, 051, 052, 099, 102, 081, 092, 013, 017, 076, and 079.
(ii) In the above procedure, a large number of random numbers is rejected. Hence, a commonly used device, i.e. remainder approach, is employed to avoid the rejection of such large numbers. The greatest three-digit multiple of 112 is 896. By using three-digit random numbers as above, the sample will comprise of households with serial numbers 086, 033, 049, 097, 051, 052, 066, 107, 015, 106 and 020.
(iii) In case the quotient approach is applied, the 3-digit multiple of 112 is 896 and . Using the same random numbers and dividing them by 8, we have the sample of households with list numbers 025, 004, 020, 026, 006, 006, 092, 041, 085, 027 and 086 with the replacement method and with list numbers 025, 004, 020, 026, 006, 092, 041, 085, 027, 086 and 042 without the replacement method.
Example 2.2: Ten orchards, in a locality near Lucknow, were having 125, 793, 970, 830, 1502, 864, 503, 106, 970, 312 fruit trees, respectively. Draw a random sample of 10 fruit trees by using random numbers.
Let us assume that in the first orchard the fruit trees bear serial numbers 1 to 125, in the second orchard from 126 to 918, and so on. Hence, the cumulative serial numbers may be written as, 125, 918, 1888, 2718, 4220, 5084, 5587, 5693, 6663, 6975. By using 4-digit random numbers of the above-said table with similar notions, we have 1983, 0330, 1614, 2096, 0511, 0524, 3311, 6874, 2183 and 6926.
With the first random number 1983, we select the fruit tree bearing serial number 95 in the 4th orchard. Similarly, with the second random number 0330, we select the tree bearing serial number 205 in the 2nd orchard, and so on. Working out this procedure further, we find that orchards included in the sample have serial numbers 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10. Thus, it is not necessary to give serial numbers to fruit trees in all the orchards, only five orchards of the above-shown numbers will suffice the purpose of selecting a random sample of 10 fruit trees.
2.3 ESTIMATION OF POPULATION PARAMETERS
Let us assume that each unit  in the population is associated with a variate value , for the character . For parameters, let us designate
The population total, 
The population mean, 
The population variance, 
Let the  units in the sample be , with variate values  respectively. The estimators of population total and mean are given by

and

respectively.
The factor  by which the sample total is multiplied is sometimes called the expansion or raising or inflation factor. Its inverse  is called the sampling fraction and is denoted by the letter  in this text.
Theorem 2.3.1: In simple random sampling, wor, the sample mean  is an unbiased estimator of  and its sampling variance is given by

where

Proof: We have

By definition,

Hence, 
Thus the sample mean is an unbiased estimator of the population mean.
The variance of  is given by

Since

and

Thus,

which proves the theorem.
Corollary 1: In simple random sampling, wor, the standard error of  is given by

Corollary 2: In simple random sampling, wor, the variance of , as an estimator of the population total , is obtained as

Corollary 3: In simple random sampling, wor, the standard error of  is given by

If sampling is with replacement, a random sample of size  gives sample mean  as an unbiased estimator. From the above results, it can be seen easily that terms  for the variance and  for the standard error are introduced due to finiteness of the population and these are called finite population corrections (fpc). In case of random sampling, wr, the variance and standard error can be obtained by ignoring finite population correction.
Corollary 4: In random sampling, wr, the variance and standard error of  can be written as

If  is small as compared to , the fpc will not differ much from unity and the sampling variance of the mean will be nearly equal to that of the mean of a sample drawn from an infinite population.
Corollary 5: In random sampling, wr, the variance and standard error of  can be written as

Theorem 2.3.2: In simple random sampling,

is an unbiased estimator of .
Proof: We may write

Therefore,

Hence  is an unbiased estimator of .
Corollary 1: An unbiased estimator of the variance of  in random sampling, wor, is given by

For an estimate of the standard error, we take .
Corollary 2: An unbiased estimator of the variance of  in random sampling, wor, is given by

For an estimate of the standard error, we take .
Corollary 3: An unbiased estimator of the variance of  in random sampling, wr, is given by

For an estimate of the standard error, we take .
Corollary 4: An unbiased estimator of the variance  in random sampling, wr, is given by

For an estimate of the standard error, we take .
Example 2.3: A random sample of  households was drawn from a small colony of 5 households (hypothetical population) having monthly income (in rupees) as follows:
(i) Calculate population mean , variance  and mean square error .
(ii) Enumerate all possible samples of size 2 by the replacement method and show that
(a) the sample mean gives an unbiased estimate of the population mean and find its sampling variance;
(b) sample variance  is an unbiased estimate of the population variance ; and
(c)  is an unbiased estimator of , i.e. .
(iii) Enumerate all possible samples of size 2 by the without replacement method and show that
(a) the sample mean gives an unbiased estimate of the population mean and find its sampling variance;
(b) the sample variance  is an unbiased estimate of the population variance ; and
(c)  is an unbiased estimator of , i.e. .
(i) The population mean of 5 households

The population variance

Hence 
(ii) It can be seen that the total number of possible samples is 25 . Also, each of the 25 possible samples has the same probability  of being selected.
Table 2.3.1: All samples of 2 units from 5 units in simple random sampling with replacement

(a) The expected value of  is given by the average value of column (6), which works out to be the population mean 158.0, thus verifying that the estimator is unbiased. We find from columns (6) and (7) of Table 2.3.1 that these estimates differ, in general, from , and that the error usually varies from sample to sample. Further, it is of interest to note from column (7) that each sample mean  given by column (6) is an unbiased estimate of the population mean  as the average of column (7) is zero, which proves the result. The sampling variance is the mean of the squares of error [column (7)] which works out to 19.40 .
(b) The sample variance  is given by  which is twice the value given in column (8). Hence,  shows that  is equal to 38.80 , which shows that  is an unbiased estimator for the population variance in simple random sampling, wr.
(c) An estimator of  is given by , the values which are given in column (8) of Table 2.3.1 for possible samples. The expected value of  is the average of the values in column (8), showing that . Thus the estimate  is unbiased.
Table 2.3.2: All samples of 2 units from 5 units in simple random sampling without replacement

(iii) In case of random sampling, wor, the number of possible samples is . It can be seen that each of the 10 possible samples has the same probability  of being selected.
(a) The expected value of , which is given by the average of column (6) of Table 2.3.2, works out to be the population mean 158.0, thus verifying that  is an unbiased estimator of . Further, the sampling variance which is obtained by averaging the squares of errors given in column (7) works out to be 14.55, verifying that .
(b) Since the sample variance  is given by , which can be obtained easily, the average of 10 sample mean squares gives .
Here, . Also, the population mean square . Thus, the sample mean square provides an unbiased estimator of the population mean square , verifying that .
(c) An estimator of  is given by , the values which are given in column (8) of Table 2.3.2 and may be used here. The expected value of , which is the average of the values in the column (8), is 14.55, showing that the estimator is unbiased, i.e., .
2.4 ESTIMATION OF POPULATION PROPORTION
Sometimes, the units in the population are classified in two groups: (i) having a particular characteristic and (ii) not having that characteristic. For example, a crop field may be irrigated or not irrigated. If it is irrigated, we say that it possesses the characteristic, "irrigation'. If it is not irrigated, we say that it does not possess the particular characteristic of irrigation. If we are interested in estimating the proportion of irrigated fields, the population of  fields can be defined with variate  as having value 1 if the field is irrigated, otherwise zero. If the total number of irrigated fields be , out of 

Thus,

and

Thus, the problem of estimating a population proportion becomes that of estimating a population mean by defining the variate as above. If  units out of a random sample of size  possess that characteristic, the sample proportion is given by . Thus

Hence, an unbiased estimator of  is given by

Theorem 2.4.1: In sampling, wor, the variance of  is given by

where . The proof is obvious.
Corollary 1: In sampling, wr, the variance of  is given by

Corollary 2: The variance of , the estimated total number of units with some desired characteristic, is given by

Theorem 2.4.2: In sampling, wor, an unbiased estimator of  is given by

The proof is obvious.
Corollary 1: In sampling, wr, an unbiased estimator of  is given by

Corollary 2: An unbiased estimate of the variance of  is given by

Corollary 3: The coefficient of variation of  is given by

Example 2.4: A list of 3000 voters of a ward in a city was examined for measuring the accuracy of age of individuals. A random sample of 300 names was taken, which revealed that 51 citizens were shown with wrong ages. Estimate the total number of voters having a wrong description of age in the list and estimate the standard error.
Here, 
The estimate of the total number of voters having a wrong description of age is obtained by

(i) If sampling, wr, is considered, the estimate of the standard error is given by

(ii) If sampling, wor, is considered, the estimated standard error is given by

2.5 COMBINATION OF UNBIASED ESTIMATORS
There are situations where the estimates based on several samples will have to be pooled to get a combined estimate. If  are unbiased estimators of a parameter , which are mutually independent, then the pooled estimator

is also an unbiased estimator of . The variance of  is given by

and estimate of variance

We shall consider the problem for the following cases:
(i) Simple random sampling for variables
(ii) Simple random sampling for attributes
2.5.1 Simple Random Sampling for Variables
Let us suppose that  are the sample means, each of which is drawn independently, with sizes . A pooled estimator of all samples is given by taking
(i) the arithmetic mean of  estimates

(ii) the weighted mean of  estimates

where .
When Sampling is With Replacement Method
The sampling variances of  and  are given by

and

Unbiased estimators of  and  are provided by

and

It should be noted that the estimate given in relation (2.5.5) is more efficient than that given in relation (2.5.4) and can be verified by comparing the variances in both the cases.
When Sampling is Without Replacement Method
The sampling variances of  and  are given by

and

Unbiased estimators of  and  are provided by

and

The estimators  and  become identical if the sample sizes  are the same.
2.5.2 Simple Random Sampling for Attributes
The results obtained in the previous section can be applied to simple random sampling for attributes also. If  are the sample proportions based on  samples of size  each of which is drawn independently. A pooled estimator of all sample is given by taking
(i) the arithmetic mean of  estimates

(ii) The weighted mean of  estimates

where .
2.6 CONFIDENCE LIMITS
In order to draw conclusions about the population parameter, confidence limits are constructed around the sample estimate. If the sample size is large, the sample mean is normally distributed with mean  and variance . Hence, the  confidence limits for the population mean are given by

where  is the value of the normal variate corresponding to the given level of confidence.
Example 2.5: A simple random sample of 50 plots was selected from a population of 500 plots to estimate the total yield of a crop. The sample mean yield per plot was 550 kg with a sample variance . Estimate the total yield of the crop and set up 95% confidence limits.
Here, 
The estimated total yield is

The standard error of  is

For 95% confidence, . The confidence limits are

2.7 ESTIMATION OF SAMPLE SIZE
In planning a sample survey for estimating the population parameters, the important question is how to determine the size of the sample to be drawn. It can be done by specifying the degree of risk (or precision) in terms of permissible loss and the level of confidence. Before we discuss the problem for different sampling methods, let us approach a generalized solution to the problem of estimation of sample size.
Let  be the amount of error by taking the estimate and let  be the loss incurred by taking it. For a given sampling method, the theory will provide us the density function. Thus, the expected value of the loss for a given sample size is obtained by

Let us also consider the cost function for a sample of size , denoted by

where  is the over-head cost, and  is the cost per unit in the sampling method.
By combining relations (2.7.1) and (2.7.2), we get the total loss which is given by

where  is some constant quantity.
Since the purpose in taking the sample is to minimize the total loss,  should be so chosen that relation (2.7.3) is minimized. By differentiating  with respect to  and equating , the optimum value of  can be determined.
Example 2.6: If the loss function due to an error in  is proportional to  and if the total cost of the survey is , show that with simple random sampling, ignoring fpc, the optimum value of  is , where  is a constant.
Here 
or 
where  is some constant.
Thus, it follows that

[It is assumed that  is distributed ]
Hence

By differentiation and equating , we have

A similar treatment and analysis can be applied to any sampling method in which the loss function is inversely proportional to  and the cost function is also a function of . A generalized discussion is given by Yates (1960), and Raiffa and Schlaifer (1961). Chaudhary (1977) and Chaudhary and Singh (1979) have discussed a line for sequential methods. For a classified discussion, a good account of methods is given by Nordin (1944), Blythe (1945), Deming (1950) and Tippett (1950).
Now let us elaborate the results for the simple random sampling for a characteristic which can be measured quantitatively. Let the marginal error permissible in the estimate be , and  be the level of confidence. The sample mean is assumed to be normally distributed with mean  and variance

Hence,

where  is the value of the normal variate corresponding to given , which gives

(i) if fpc is ignored, we have

(ii) if fpc is not ignored, we can get the value of  by putting the value of  in Eqn. (2.7.5) and we have,

Example 2.7: A study of sampling methods was conducted in a population having 500 sampling units. By total count it was obtained that  and . In a simple random sampling, how many sampling units should be chosen to estimate  with a permissible marginal error of 10 per cent and 95 per cent confidence coefficient, when sampling is done (i) with replacement method (ii) without replacement method?
(i) Sampling with replacement - In this case, we can ignore fpc and we have

(ii) Sampling without replacement - In this case, the fpc cannot be ignored and we take

Similarly, we can also discuss these results when the sampling units are classified by the presence or absence of a characteristic. With similar notions, the sample proportion  may be assumed to be normally distributed with  and variance . Hence, the value of  with a pre-assigned level of precision can be estimated by

where  has the same meaning given in relation (2.7.4), which gives

(i) if fpc is ignored, we have

(ii) if fpc is not ignored, we get

Example 2.8: In a population of 4000 people who were called for casting their votes, 50 per cent returned to the polls. Estimate the sample size to estimate this proportion so that the marginal error is 5 per cent with 95 per cent confidence coefficient, when the sampling is done (i) with replacement and (ii) without replacement methods.
(i) Sampling with replacement - In this case, we can ignore fpc and have,

(ii) Sampling without replacement - In this case, fpc cannot be ignored and we have,

SET OF PROBLEMS
2.1 Suppose, in a list of  factories serially numbered,  factories have gone out of existence and  new factories have been added to the list making the total number of factories . Give a simple procedure for selecting one factory with equal probability from  factories, avoiding renumbering of the original  factories and show that your procedure achieves equal probability for new factories.
2.2 With the help of random numbers, draw random samples, each of size 5, from the following:
(i) Cauchy's population:

where  and  cm and  cm
(ii) Normal population:

 and 
(iii) Bivariate normal population in which the means of two variates,  and , are 68 cm and 170 kg, respectively; the s.d's of  and  are 3 cm and 7 kg, respectively; and the correlation coefficient  is (i)  (ii) 0 and (iii) .
2.3 The following procedure has been used for selecting a sample of fields for crop-cutting experiments on paddy:
Against the name of each selected village are shown three random numbers smaller than the highest survey number. These random numbers correspond to three paddy fields for crop-cutting experiments. If the selected survey number does not grow paddy, select the next paddy growing survey number in its place.
Examine whether the above method will provide an equal chance of inclusion in the sample to all the paddy-growing survey numbers in the village, given the following:
(i) Name of the village: Payagpur
(ii) Total number of survey numbers: 299
(iii) Random numbers: 28, 189, 269
(iv) Paddy-growing survey numbers: 39 to 88 and 189 to 299
Show that the survey number 39 has a chance of  of being included in the sample, the survey number 189 a chance of , while the remaining survey numbers have a chance of only  each. (I.C.A.R., 1951)
2.4 A population contains  units, the variate value of one unit being known to be . A random sample, wor, is drawn from the remaining  units. Show that the estimator  has a smaller variance than  based on a random sample, wor, of size  taken from the whole population.
2.5 (i) Define simple random sampling. Is the sample mean a consistent and unbiased estimator of the population mean? Give the variance of the sample mean and also unbiased estimate of this variance. What is the sample size required to estimate the population mean with a given standard error?
(ii) Also, if  of the units in the sample are of type A, give an unbiased estimate of the proportion of units of type A in the population and derive its sampling variance and estimate. If the sample size is sufficiently large, write 95% confidence limits for the unknown proportion of units of type A in the population.
2.6 Suppose  distinct units occur in a sample of  units selected with equal probability with replacement from a population of  units. Show that the estimator  is unbiased for the population mean. Obtain an unbiased estimator of the variance of this estimator.
2.7 From a random sample of  units, a random sub-sample of  units is drawn without replacement and added to the original sample. Show that the mean based on  units is an unbiased estimator of the population mean, and that ratio of its variance to that of the mean of the original  units is approximately , assuming that the population size is large.
2.8 Derive the expression for variance of a simple random sample drawn without replacement from a finite population.  balls, placed in a lot container, are drawn at random from a supply of  red and  white balls. Then a sample of  balls is drawn at random from the lot container and placed in a sample container. It is found that, out of these  balls,  are red. Find the  when the  balls are put into the lot container (i) with replacement and (ii) without replacement.
2.9 In simple random sampling, the variance of the sample mean is given by . Denoting an unbiased estimator of  by  and noting that , show that

2.10 The yields in quintals for wheat crop of 100 villages in a certain tehsil are given below. (The figures within brackets indicate the village numbers).
(i) Select simple random samples of size 20 and 25 units and estimate the average yield per plot along with their standard errors on the basis of selected units.
(ii) Set up 95 per cent confidence interval and comment.
(iii) Obtain the size of the sample required for estimating the mean yield with 5 per cent standard error.

2.11 Material for the construction of 5000 wells was issued during the year 1964 in a district as part of the Grow-More-Food Campaign in India. The list of cultivators to whom it was issued together with the proposed location of each well is available. It is proposed to estimate the proportion  of wells actually constructed and used for irrigation purpose. The sample is proposed to be selected by simple random sampling. Determine the size of the sample for values of  ranging from 0.5 to 0.9, if the permissible margin of error is 10 per cent and the degree of assurance desired is 95 per cent.
2.12 The data given below pertain to one complete lactation of milk yield (in 10 kg) of 250 cows in an organised dairy farm.
(i) Select a simple random sample of size 25.
(ii) Estimate the mean with its standard error.
(iii) Construct a 95 per cent confidence limit for population mean.
2.13 The frequency distribution of 232 cities in a country, by population size (000), is given below:

REFERENCES
Cochran, W.G., Sampling Techniques, John Wiley & Sons, New York, (1977).
Deming, W.E., Some Theory of Sampling, John Wiley & Sons, New York, (1950).
Fisher, R.A., The Design of Experiments, Oliver & Boyd, London (1935).
"The Sub-Commission on Statistical Sampling of the United Nations," Bull. Int. Statist. Inst. 32, 207-209, (1950).
Hansen, M.H., Hurwitz, W.N. and Jabine, T.B., "The use of imperfect lists for probability sampling at the U.S. Bureau of the Census," Bull. Int. Statist. Inst., 40, 497-517, (1963).
Lahiri, D.B., "Some thoughts on multi-subject sample survey system," Contributions to Statistics, 175-220 (Presented to Professor P.C. Mahalanobis on his 70th Birthday). Statistical Publishing Society, Calcutta, (1963).
Mahalanobis, P.C., "On large-scale sample surveys", Phil. Trans. R. Soc., 231, 329-451, (1944). "Cost and accuracy of results in sampling and complete enumeration", Bull. Int. Statist. Inst., 32, 210-213, (1950).
Seal, K.C., "Use of outdated frames in large sample surveys" Bull. Cal. Statist. Assoc., 11, 68-84, (1962).
Singh, D., Taking Agricultural Censuses, FAO, Rome (1978).
United Nations, "Recommendations concerning the preparation of reports on sampling surveys." Statistical Paper Series, C, 1, New York, revised in 1964, Statistical Paper Series, C, 1, rev. 2, (1949).
Yates, F., Sampling Methods for Censuses and Surveys, Charles Griffin & Co., London, (1960).
Zarkovich, S.S., Sampling Methods and Censuses. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome, (1961).