3. STRATIFIED RANDOM SAMPLING
"Sir, In your otherwise beautiful poem ("The Vision of Sin") there is a verse which reads "Every moment dies a man, every moment one is born." Obviously, this cannot be true and I suggest that in the next edition you have it read "Every moment dies a man, every moment  is born." Even this value is slightly in error but should be sufficiently accurate for poetry." (in a letter to Lord Tennyson) – Charles Babbage
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Of all the methods of sampling, the procedure most commonly used in surveys is stratified sampling. In stratified sampling, the population of  units is sub-divided into  sub-populations called strata, the th sub-population having  units (). These sub-populations are non-overlapping so that they comprise the whole population such that

A sample is drawn from each stratum independently, the sample size within the th stratum being  () such that

The procedure of taking samples in this way is known as stratified sampling. If the sample is taken randomly from each stratum, the procedure is known as stratified random sampling.
The main objective of stratification is to give a better cross-section of the population so as to gain a higher degree of relative precision. To achieve this, the following points are to be examined carefully:
(i) Formation of strata
(ii) Number of strata to be made
(iii) Allocation of sample size within each stratum
(iv) Analysis of data from a stratified design
We shall discuss the first two points after examining the last two points relating to the theory of stratified sampling.
3.2 PRINCIPLES OF STRATIFICATION
The principles to be followed in stratifying a population are summarised below:
(i) The strata should be non-overlapping and should together comprise the whole population.
(ii) The stratification of population should be done in such a way that strata are homogeneous within themselves, with respect to the characteristic under study.
(iii) In many practical situations when it is difficult to stratify with respect to the characteristic under study, administrative convenience may be considered as the basis for stratification.
(iv) If the limit of precision for certain sub-populations is given, it will be better to treat each sub-population as a stratum.
3.3 ADVANTAGES OF STRATIFICATION
Stratification serves many useful purposes. The principal ones are the following:
(i) Stratification may be desired for administrative convenience. The agency conducting the survey work can establish its field offices in various administrative zones with well-defined jurisdiction, thereby leading to better organisation and supervision of field work.
(ii) Stratification by natural characteristics helps in improving the sampling design. For example, in area and yield surveys, there may be different types of sampling problems in plains, deserts and hilly areas which may need different approaches. Hence, it would be advantageous to constitute a separate stratum for each of such areas.
(iii) Stratification is particularly more effective when there are extreme values in the population which can be segregated into separate strata, thereby reducing the variability within strata. Separate estimates obtained for individual stratum can be combined into a precise estimate for the whole population.
(iv) Stratification makes it possible to use different sampling designs in different strata. In many practical situations, the information for stratification is not uniformly available for all units in the population. In these cases, the whole population is sub-divided into strata according to the nature of the information available and some suitable sampling scheme of selection of units within these strata is adopted.
(v) Stratification ensures adequate representation to various groups of the population, which may be of some interest or importance.
(vi) Stratification also ensures selection of a better cross-section of the population than that under unstratified population.
(vii) Stratification brings a gain in the precision in estimation of a characteristic of a population. To achieve it, a heterogeneous population is sub-divided into sub-populations, each of which is homogeneous within itself. If each stratum is homogeneous such that measurement, within it vary little from one unit to another, a more precise estimate can be obtained by taking a relatively smaller sample.
3.4 NOTATIONS
Let  denote for the stratum and  for the sampling unit within the stratum. The following symbols refer to stratum :
 total number of units
 number of units in sample
 stratum weight
 sampling fraction in the stratum
Let  be the value of the th unit in the stratum.
  stratum mean
  sample mean
  stratum variance
3.5 ESTIMATION OF THE POPULATION MEAN AND ITS VARIANCE
Suppose that a population of  units is divided into  strata. The population mean per unit can be written as

An estimator  (st for stratified) for the population mean  can be written as

which is different from the overall sample mean

Theorem 3.5.1: If in every stratum the sample estimator  is unbiased and samples are drawn independently in different strata, then  is an unbiased estimator of the population mean and its sampling variance is given by

Proof: We have that

This shows that  is an unbiased estimator.
To obtain the sampling variance, we note that sampling is done independently in each stratum and, therefore,

Theorem 3.5.2: For stratified random sampling, wor, the sample estimator  is unbiased and its sampling variance is given by

Proof: Since, in each stratum, a simple random sample is taken,  is an unbiased estimator of  and hence, by Theorem 3.5.1, it can be shown that  is an unbiased estimator of .
Further, by Theorem 2.3.1 applied to an individual stratum, we have

Substituting the value in the result of Theorem 3.5.1, we get

Corollary 1: If  is the estimator of the population total , then  is an unbiased estimator and its sampling variance is given by

Corollary 2: If in every stratum , the variance of  reduces to

Corollary 3: If in every stratum , and the variance in all strata has the same value , the result reduces to

Corollary 4: For stratified random sampling, wr,  is an unbiased estimator and its sampling variance is given by

Theorem 3.5.3: In stratified random sampling, wor, with sample size ;  an unbiased estimator of the population proportion  is given by

with its variance

where  is the sample estimate of proportion  in the th stratum. The proof is obvious.
Corollary 1:  can be taken as unity, we have

Corollary 2: If stratified random sampling is with replacement, the sampling variance is given by

Corollary 3: If in every stratum , the sampling variance reduces to


The variance of  depends on the product of  and  within strata. The product is small if  is near zero or unity. Thus, the efficiency can be increased if the strata are formed such that units belonging to a given class are allocated in the same stratum.
3.6 ESTIMATE OF VARIANCE
If a simple random sample is taken within each stratum, an unbiased estimator of  is given by

Then, an unbiased estimator of sampling variance of  can be obtained as follows:
Theorem 3.6: With stratified random sampling, wor, an unbiased estimator of the variance of  is given by

The proof is obvious.
Corollary 1: With stratified random sampling, wor, an unbiased estimator of  reduces to

Corollary 2: With stratified random sampling, wor, an unbiased estimator of  is given by

3.7 ALLOCATION OF SAMPLE SIZE IN DIFFERENT STRATA
In stratified sampling, the allocation of the sample to different strata is done by the consideration of three factors, viz.,
(i) the total number of units in the stratum, i.e. stratum size
(ii) the variability within the stratum, and
(iii) the cost in taking observations per sampling unit in the stratum.
A good allocation is one where maximum precision is obtained with minimum resources, or in other words, the criterion for allocation is to minimize the budget for a given variance or minimize the variance for a fixed budget, thus making the most effective use of the available resources.
There are four methods of allocation of sample sizes to different strata in a stratified sampling procedure. These are:
(i) Equal allocation
(ii) Proportional allocation
(iii) Neyman allocation
(iv) Optimum allocation
3.7.1 Equal Samples From Each Stratum
This is a situation of considerable practical interest for reasons of administrative or field work convenience. In this method, the total sample size  is divided equally among all the strata, i.e. for the th stratum

3.7.2 Proportional Allocation
This allocation, generally known as proportional allocation, was originally proposed by Bowley (1926). This procedure of allocation is very common in practice because of its simplicity. When no other information except , the total number of units in the th stratum, is available, the allocation of a given sample of size  to different strata is done in proportion to their sizes, i.e. in the th stratum,

This means that the sampling fraction is the same in all strata. It gives a self-weighting sample by which numerous estimates can be made with greater speed and a higher degree of precision.
3.7.3 Neyman Allocation
This allocation of the total sample size to strata is called minimum variance allocation and is due to Neyman (1934). This result appears to have been first discovered by Tschuprow (1923) but remained unknown until it was rediscovered independently by Neyman. The allocation of samples among different strata is based on a joint consideration of the stratum size and the stratum variation. In this allocation, it is assumed that the sampling cost per unit among different strata is the same and the size of the sample is fixed. Sample sizes are allocated by

A formula for the minimum variance with fixed  is obtained by substituting the value of  in Eqn. (3.5.6) when we get

There may be difficulty in using this method as the value of  will usually be unknown. However, the stratum variances may be obtained from previous surveys or from a specially planned pilot survey. The other alternative is to conduct the main survey in a phased manner and utilize the data collected in the first phase for ensuring better allocation in the second phase.
3.7.4 Optimum Allocation
In this method of allocation the sample sizes  in the respective strata are determined with a view to minimize  for a specified cost of conducting the sample survey or to minimize the cost for a specified value of . The simplest cost function in stratified sampling that can be taken is

where the overhead cost  is constant and  is the average cost of surveying one unit in the th stratum, which may depend upon the nature and size of the units in the stratum.
To determine the optimum value of , we consider the function

where  is some unknown constant.
Using the calculus method of Lagrange multipliers, we select  and the constant  to minimize .
Differentiating with respect to , we have

or

Summing over all strata, we get

From relations (3.7.7) and (3.7.8) we can obtain

Thus the relation (3.7.9) leads to the following important conclusions that, in a given stratum, we have to take a larger sample if
(i) the stratum size is larger;
(ii) the stratum has larger variability; and
(iii) the cost per unit is cheaper in the stratum.
If 's are the same from stratum to stratum, relation (3.7.9) will lead to the Neyman allocation. Similarly, if 's and 's do not vary from stratum to stratum, relation (3.7.9) will lead to proportional allocation.
The total sample size  required for estimating the population with a specified cost  is given by

If  is fixed, we find

The values of the stratum variances can be obtained from earlier surveys or from a knowledge of the measurements within each stratum.
An alternative proof of the allocation results due to Stuart (1954) may be summarized as follows:
Let  and  be the parts of  and  that depend on  or in a simple form,  and .
Minimizing  for fixed  or vice versa are both equivalent to minimizing the product

Now, by Cauchy-Schwarz's inequality,

we have

The equality being if and only if  is proportional to , i.e.

which yields

(i) In case , we get from relation (3.7.13) the optimum sample sizes within strata as given in relation (3.7.9).
(ii) In case  and , the optimum sample sizes for Neyman allocation are given by the above relation.
(iii) In case  and , proportional allocation is also obtained by the above relation.
3.8 RELATIVE PRECISION OF STRATIFIED RANDOM SAMPLING WITH SIMPLE RANDOM SAMPLING
In this section, we shall make a comparative study of the usual estimators under simple random sampling, without stratification and stratified random sampling employing various schemes of allocation, i.e. proportional and optimum allocations. The variances of these estimators of mean are denoted by ,  and  respectively.
Theorem 3.8.1: If fpc is ignored, show that

Proof: When fpc is ignored, we have



Since terms  and  are negligible, we can have

Hence, we have


or  a positive quantity.
Thus, it proves that .
Hence, it may be concluded that the larger the difference in the stratum means, the greater is the gain in precision with proportional allocation over simple random sampling.
Similarly


where .
Also

which proves that . Hence, .
It concludes that Neyman's optimum allocation gives better results than proportional allocation. We observe from Eqn. (3.8.4) that as we change from simple random sampling to stratified random sampling with Neyman's allocation, the gain in precision of the estimates results from two factors, viz.
(i) the differences between stratum means and
(ii) the difference between the stratum standard deviations.
Corollary: If fpc cannot be neglected, show that .
Example 3.1: 2000 cultivators' holdings in Uttar Pradesh (India) were stratified according to their sizes. The number of holdings (), mean area under wheat per holding () and s.d. of area under wheat per holding () are given below for each stratum:

For a sample of 200 farms, compute the sample size in each stratum under proportional and optimum allocations. Calculate the sampling variance of the estimated area under wheat from the sample (i) if the farms are selected under proportional allocation by with and without replacement methods, (ii) if the farms are selected under Neyman's allocation by with and without replacement methods. Also compute the gain in efficiency from these procedures as compared to simple random sampling.
The relevant calculations have been shown below in Table 3.1:
Table 3.8.1: Calculations of allocations, means and sampling variances

Proportional Allocation:  or 
The numbers of holdings to be selected from strata are given in column (6) of the table and are 40, 46, 38, 33, 17, 11 and 15, respectively.

If fpc is ignored, we have

Optimum Allocation:  or 
The numbers of holdings to be selected from strata are given in column (8) of the table and are 19, 36, 34, 39, 24, 17 and 31, respectively.

If fpc is ignored, we get

Simple Random Sampling: The variance of the estimate of mean is given by

If fpc is ignored, we get

(i) The relative precision of proportional allocation is given by
(a) without replacement method 
(b) with replacement method 
(ii) The relative precision of optimum allocation is given by
(a) without replacement method 
(b) with replacement method 
3.9 ESTIMATION OF GAIN IN PRECISION DUE TO STRATIFICATION
In comparing the precision of stratified with unstratified random sampling, it was assumed that the population values of stratum means and variances were known.
It is sometimes of interest to examine, from a survey, how useful the mode of stratification has been. What is available is only a stratified sample and the problem is to estimate the gain in precision due to stratification. An estimate of the variance of the estimate, in case of unstratified sampling, is obtained from a stratified sample and a comparison can be made with a situation in which no stratification is done.
Let  represent the stratified sample. Also, stratum means and variances are estimated from the sample. Let us denote the estimated stratum means by  and the estimated variances by . The problem is, therefore, to get an unbiased estimate of  based on the given stratified sample. Here, it can be shown that an estimate  will not be an unbiased estimate of .
An unbiased estimator of  based on stratified sample is given by

The estimate of the relative gain in precision due to stratification is thus obtained by

If the sample allocation is large enough in each stratum, i.e., , the relation (3.9.1) reduces to

In actual practice, it is found that sampling variance is not much sensitive to small or even moderate deviations in the allocations. If allocation is proportional, i.e. , we can write , by applying the technique of analysis of variance, as

giving that  is an unbiased estimator in proportional allocation.
Example 3.3: The number of pepper standards for selected villages in each of the three strata of Trivandrum zone is as follows:

Estimate the total number of pepper standards along with its standard error in Trivandrum zone. Also, estimate the gain in precision due to stratification.
The relevant calculations have been done in Table 3.2. (Note: Table 3.2 data reconstructed from OCR artifacts for clarity)
An estimate of the total number of pepper standards is given by

An estimate of variance of  is

or standard error of 
Estimate of the variance of the total number of pepper standards, when simple random sampling is assumed, is given by

Thus, the percentage gain in precision due to stratification


3.10 FORMATION OF STRATA
The problem of formation of strata has been discussed by Hagood and Bernert (1945), Dalenius (1950, 1952), Dalenius and Gurney (1951), Mahalanobis (1952) and Dalenius and Hodges (1959). Ekman suggested approximations to the theoretical solutions. Cochran (1961) has examined the application of these approximations through empirical studies. Sethi (1963) derived the solutions for optimum points of stratification in case of certain populations and Hess, Sethi and Balakrishnan (1966) have applied these solutions to some empirical studies. In this section, we shall discuss in brief the outlines for the construction of strata on these lines, although the results derived are necessarily approximate and of limited importance from the point of view of application.
In order to form  strata, the range of main variates under study is to be subdivided at the points  such that . It has been seen earlier in Eqn. (3.5.10) that the variance of  (with proportional allocation) is given by

As mentioned in the beginning, the main purpose of stratification is to increase precision, therefore  is to be minimized. Since the term  in relation (3.10.1) is a constant and independent of stratification, the problem is to obtain a value of  which maximizes . Assuming that all points except  are fixed, it can be proved that the value of  which maximizes the term is given by iterative procedures as

This shows that the best  is the average of the two strata means, which it separates. Hence, all the points,  () can be obtained and the desired strata formed.
The problem of strata construction in equal and optimum allocations can also be treated similarly. The sampling variances in equal allocation and optimum allocation are

Proceeding as before, the best points of stratification in the two cases are given by

and

for , respectively.
Since it is difficult to apply them in practical situations, due to the heavy computational work, some approximate solutions and simpler methods are summarized below:
(i) Equalization of : Dalenius and Gurney (1951) suggested that the construction of strata on the basis of equalization of  and giving equal allocation to the strata, would lead to optimum stratification. This method is not convenient in practice since it involves the calculation of  for different stratification points.
(ii) Equalization of strata totals: Another rule widely used was proposed by Mahalanobis (1952). He suggested making strata which have the same aggregate size , with equal allocation. This would lead to efficient stratification if the strata coefficients of variation are the same. This procedure was found to give poorer results when applied to normal, gamma and beta distributions (Sethi, 1963).
(iii) Equalization of : Among the other approximate rules suggested is the one by Ayoma (1954), in which he suggested the formation of strata on the basis of equalization of strata ranges and with equal allocation. Ekman (1959) suggested also the equalization of  for forming strata with equal allocation, where  is the range of the variate in the th stratum. This method is quite simple and can be useful in practice. A good performance of Ekman's method has also been reported in all these cases.
(iv) Equalization of cumulatives of : Dalenius and Hodges (1959) suggested construction of strata by equalization of the cumulative of , where  is the frequency function. The assumptions of the rule are that the distribution is bounded and that the number of strata is large. Sethi (1963) has shown that this rule provides optimum stratification even when the number of strata is as small as 2 or 3.
(v) Equalization of : Durbin (1959) suggested the equalization of the cumulative frequencies of a distribution, , which is in between the original distribution  and rectangular distribution  over the given range of .  is given by , where  is the distribution function of  and  is the range of the study variate. Thus, the best points of stratification are obtained by equalization of the cumulatives of the function

Rules for obtaining optimum points of stratification with different types of estimators are given by Singh (1967), in which optimum properties have also been studied.
3.11 DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF STRATA
In context with the decision about the number of strata, the points to be discussed are
(i) how  decreases as  increases?
(ii) how the cost of survey is affected by a change in ?
Dalenius and Gurney (1951), Dalenius (1953), Cochran (1961), Sethi (1963), and Hess, Sethi and Balakrishnan (1966) have discussed the first question and some models have been proposed for the determination of the number of strata. For the second aspect regarding the cost with a change in , Sethi (1963) suggested that an increase in  beyond 6 would seldom be profitable. Some results which have practical significance in surveys have been discussed in this section in the light of the above mentioned works.
It can be shown easily that stratification increases efficiency if the number of strata is increased by further sub-division of the strata. The ultimate limit of stratification is the sample size so as to arrive at the point of selecting only one unit from each stratum. But it can also be shown that multiplication of strata beyond a reasonable number is not profitable. In large-scale surveys, there may not be much advantage by increasing the number of strata up to the maximum possible extent because it may adversely affect the cost of the survey. It has been conjectured by Dalenius (1953) that the ratio of the variance of an estimator of the population mean based on  optimum strata to that based on  optimum strata is  approximately, i.e.

This relationship has been verified by Cochran (1961) for  and 4, for eight distributions relating to different characteristics and found to hold good in all cases.
For determination of the optimum number of strata, the cost function may be defined as

where  is the overhead cost and  and  are the costs per stratum and per unit, respectively.
Sethi (1963) has shown that for optimum stratification with proportional and equal allocations, in case of gamma distribution, the relationship between sampling variance and number of strata is of the form

where  are constants to be determined by considering the values of the variance ratio for  and 3.
The optimum value of  for a given cost can be determined with the value which minimises Eqn. (3.11.3) along with restrictions given by Eqn. (3.11.2). It can be shown easily that the optimum values of  and  are given by

For ensuring a specified efficiency with minimum cost, a similar procedure can be followed. Generally, this is being done by graphing the variance or cost against the number of strata for different values of . The optimum number of strata is then to be located in them carefully.
3.12 METHOD OF COLLAPSED STRATA
Sometimes the population is so heterogeneous that, to achieve a better representation of the population, stratification is carried to the point that only one unit is selected from each stratum. In such cases, it will not be possible to estimate the variance of the estimated mean.
An approximate estimate of the variance of the estimated mean may be obtained by grouping the strata in pairs. The method of grouping together pairs of strata whose means do not differ much is called the technique of collapsed strata.
Let the units drawn in a typical pair be  and  where  takes value from 1 to ,  being an even number. Then, averaging over all samples from this pair,



where the paired strata have the same size . Hence, it is easy to see that

This shows that the quantity , used as an estimate of the variance, will overestimate . The second term will be negligible if the strata are so grouped in pairs that their sample values differ very little from each other. In other words, the pairing should be so arranged that the strata forming the pair are about equal in size in total of .
Hartley, Rao and Keifer (1969) have suggested a method where collapsing of strata is not involved. They have used one or more auxiliary variates on which the stratum means are supposed to have a linear regression. This method may lead to smaller bias in variance estimation, in many situations, than the method discussed above. Fuller (1970) has also developed a method of strata construction that provides an unbiased estimate of  with one unit per stratum. The designs are developed for equal and unequal probability sampling.
3.13 POST-STRATIFICATION (STRATIFICATION AFTER SELECTION OF SAMPLE)
In stratified sampling, it is presumed that the stratum sizes in the sampling frame in each stratum are available. However, there are instances where the latter is not always available, e.g. from the voter list of a given locality, the age of an individual voter is available although the lists of voters belonging to different age groups are not. With some characteristic which is suitable for stratification, it is not possible to know in advance to which stratum a sampling unit belongs until the sample is selected. So the technique of post-stratification consists in classifying the population and the selected sample into a given number of strata after selection of the sample. The problem of post-stratification has been discussed by Hansen, Hurwitz and Madow (1953). A simple procedure for getting approximations to the variance of a post-stratified estimator has been given by Williams (1962). We shall examine here the gain in precision due to such post-stratification.
Let us assume that  and  () are known. If the sample is considered as a stratified sample, then instead of sample mean  we use the weighted mean  which would be an unbiased estimator of the population mean . Since, for each 

Hence

Let us further suppose that the sample size is so large that none of the 's () is zero. If  () are fixed, then we have

Using the conditional variance formula given in relation 1.3.10 we have


since the second term is independent of .

An exact expression for relation (3.13.4) cannot be derived. However, for large  and , Stephan (1945) has shown that

Substituting the value in relation (3.13.4), we get

The first term in relation (3.13.6) is the value of  with proportional allocation. The second term represents the adjustment in the variance due to post-stratification, which will be small in comparison to the first term if  is large. Hence post-stratification is almost as precise as proportional stratified sampling for large samples.
3.14 DEEP STRATIFICATION
Suppose there are two alternative criteria of stratification. The question then arises as to which of the two criteria of stratification is to be preferred. An obvious choice is to opt for two-way stratification which yields  rows and  columns on the basis of those two stratification variables. There shall be  strata and thus a sample of size  is required to estimate the population mean. If it is required to estimate the variance of the estimated mean, at least two observations should be taken from each stratum so the minimum sample size must be . A problem arises when  and it is also desired to give proportional allocation to each criterion of stratification. Bryant, Hartley and Jessen (1960) have given an interesting and simple solution to this problem. The steps involved in this procedure are as follows:
(i) construct a square of  cells with  rows and  columns,
(ii) select  of the cells with equal probability such that no two selected cells belong to the same column or row,
(iii) amalgamate the  rows to form  strata such that the th stratum has an allocation of  units, and
(iv) amalgamate the  columns to form  strata such that the th stratum has an allocation of  units.
Let  be the number of cells from the deep th stratum selected in the sample. An unbiased estimator of the population mean is given by

In stratified sampling, if unit A0 or B0 is drawn from stratum I we would like to draw units c1, d1 or e1 from stratum II so that both types of stratification are present with sample size 2. Similarly, c1 or d1 (stratum I) is desired with a0 or b0 (stratum II). The probability of a desired combination is . Controlled selection makes the probability of these preferred samples as high as possible. Here we find that the only non-preferred sample is c1e1 and the total probability of preferred sample is 0.90.
It can be seen from the above example that we have conceptually attempted to select 2 units from 4 deep strata formed on the basis of two stratification systems. It should also be noted that the selection is not made independently, but in a dependent manner. Yet the original probabilities of selection of units are preserved. If the probabilities are  and , then an unbiased estimator of the total is given by

The sampling variance of  is given by

which is different from that given by independent selection.
SET OF PROBLEMS
3.1 A population is divided into 2 strata of sizes  and  units. Let , where  is a general allocation of the total sample size , and  is the optimum allocation for the estimation of mean in stratified random sampling.
(i) Show that the relative precision of a general allocation to the optimum allocation is given by

where .
(ii) Show that the relative precision is never less than .
3.2 Prove that

3.3 The variate , which is non-negative follows the exponential distribution . The population is divided into 2 strata at a specified point , and a stratified random sample of size  is taken with proportional allocation. Derive  as a function of . Also find the optimum value of  which will minimize the variance.
3.4 The variate  has rectangular distribution in the interval . The interval is divided into  equal sub-intervals which form  strata of equal size. From each stratum, a simple random sample of size  units is drawn. Let  and  be the variances for stratified and unstratified samples of size , respectively, prove that .
3.5 For the normal population ,  denotes the ordinate at  and  the weight between  and . If the distribution is truncated at  and , show that the mean  and variances  of the truncated distribution are given by

and

3.6 A population is divided into 2 strata of sizes  and  and s.d's  and .  and  are nearly equal and fpc can be ignored, show that

The cost of the survey is fixed and given by . Assuming that , compute the relative increases in precision by using proportional allocation when  and .
3.7 An investigator desires to take a stratified random sample with the following assumptions:

(i) Estimate the values of  and  which minimize the total field cost  for a given value of .
(ii) Estimate the total sample size required, under the scheme of optimum allocation, to make , when fpc is ignored.
(iii) Also estimate the cost of the survey.
3.8 After the sample in Exercise 3.7 was taken, it was found that the field costs were actually Rs. 2 per unit in stratum 1 and Rs. 10 in stratum 2. How much has the field cost changed from the anticipated value?
If the exact field cost is known in advance, how could the value  be obtained for the original estimated cost given in Exercise 3.7.
3.9 For estimating the average catch of fish on a certain part of the coastal region, the number of fish-landing centres was divided into two geographical strata of equal number of centres. From among the large number of operating units, 3 units were selected by simple random sampling for recording the weight of catch. The data obtained are given below:

Obtain an estimate of the average catch per unit, for the coast, with its standard error. For a given number of centres to be selected, what is the optimum break up between the two strata when the number of units selected at a centre are 3 and 4. Calculate the number of centres and the optimum break up necessary to estimate the average catch with 5 per cent standard error.
3.10 The following data show the wheat acreage of a stratified random sample of 1 in 20 taken from a certain district:
(Table data provided in original text)
Size group 1: (1-5) acreage: 22 farms, no wheat
Size group 2: (6-20) acreage: 25 farms, 7 acreage of wheat on one farm.
Estimate the total wheat acreage of the district and the mean acreage of wheat per farm. Estimate also the number of farms growing wheat. What are the standard errors of the estimates?
3.11 A sample survey for estimating the number of orchards of apple was conducted in Mahasu district of Himachal Pradesh (India) during a given year. Four strata A, B, C and D of villages, according to the acreage of temperate fruit trees as obtained from the revenue records, were formed. The sizes of strata (in acres) were 0-3, 3-6, 6-15 and 15 and above, respectively. A simple random sample of villages in each stratum was selected and the number of apple orchards was noted in the selected villages. The numbers of apple orchards for various strata are given below:
(Table data provided in original text)
Estimate the number of orchards in the district. Calculate whether there is any gain due to stratification, over simple random sampling. Using the value of , the mean square within the th stratum as the variance, give an optimum allocation of 48 villages.
3.12 In a pilot sample survey conducted in the district of Wardha (India), for estimation of total cattle population in the district, a two way stratification of the district by tehsils and sizes of the villages, as judged by the number of households, was adopted. A total sample of 125 villages was distributed equally among all 9 strata. Villages were sampled with equal probability and without replacement within each stratum. All households in a village were enumerated for total cattles. The total cattle and mean square between villages within each stratum are given on page 78.
Calculate the sampling variance of the estimated total cattle population in the district, for the sample of 60 villages, if the villages were selected by the method of
(i) simple random sampling without stratification, and
(ii) simple random sampling within each stratum and allocated in proportion to the product .
(Table data provided in original text)
3.13 For a socio economic survey, all the villages in a region, including the uninhabited ones, were grouped into four strata on the basis of their altitude above sea level and population density. From each stratum, 10 villages were selected with srs wr. The data on the number of households in each of the sample villages are given below:
(Table data provided in original text)
(i) Obtain an estimate of the total number of households and its standard error.
(ii) Estimate the gain due to use of stratification as compared to unstratified srs wr.
(iii) Compare the efficiency of the present allocation with that of the optimum allocation, keeping the total sample size fixed.
3.14 Using the data given below and considering the size classes as strata compare the efficiencies of the following alternative allocations of a sample of 3000 factories for estimating the total output. The sample is to be selected with srs wor within each stratum:
(i) Proportional allocation
(ii) Allocation proportional to total output
(iii) Optimum allocation
(Table data provided in original text)
3.15 A survey is to be conducted for estimating the total number of literates in a town inhabited by three communities, some particulars of which are given below on the basis of the results of a pilot survey:

(i) Treating the community as strata and assuming srs wr in each stratum allocate a total sample size of 2000 persons to the strata in an optimum manner for estimating the overall proportion of literates in the town.
(ii) Estimate the efficiency of stratification as compared to unstratified sampling.
REFERENCES
Avadhani, N.M.S.B. and B.V. Sukhatme, "Controlled sampling with equal probabilities and without replacement", Int. Statist. Rev., 41, 175-183, (1973).
Ayoma, H. "A study of the stratified random sampling". Ann. Inst. Statist. Math., 6, 1-36, (1954).
Bowley, A.L., "Measurement of precision attained in sampling," Bull. Inter. Statist. Inst., 22, 1-62, (1926).
Bryant, E.G., "An analysis of some two-way stratifications" Ph.D. Thesis, Iowa State University, Iowa (1955).
Bryant, E.C., H.O. Hartley and R.J. Jessen, "Design and estimation in two-way stratification" J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 55, 105-124, (1960).
Cochran, W.G. "Comparison of methods for determining stratum boundaries" Bull. Int. Statist. Inst., 38, 345-358, (1961).