4. SYSTEMATIC RANDOM SAMPLING
4.1 INTRODUCTION
In the previous chapters we have discussed those sampling techniques where sampling units were selected randomly. Now we shall discuss a sampling technique which has a nice feature of selecting the whole sample with just one random start. A sampling technique in which only the first unit is selected with the help of random numbers and the rest get selected automatically according to some pre-designed pattern is known as systematic random sampling. Systematic random sampling is also referred to briefly as systematic sampling.
Suppose  units of the population are numbered from 1 to  in some order. Let , where  is the sample size and  is an integer, and a random number less than or equal to  be selected and every th unit thereafter. The resultant sample is called every th systematic sample and such a procedure termed linear systematic sampling. If , and every th unit be included in a circular manner till the whole list is exhausted, it will be called circular systematic sampling.
Systematic sampling is simple and foolproof. Apart from its simplicity, this procedure, in many situations, provides estimates more efficient than simple random sampling and is widely used in various types of surveys. Systematic sampling has been discussed at length by Madow and Madow (1944), Madow (1949, 1953) and others. Its applications in different fields has been demonstrated by Finney (1948) and Sukhatme et al. (1958). Singh et al. (1968) have suggested a modified systematic sampling procedure and its suitability has been illustrated by its application to a survey for estimating milk yield.
4.2 SAMPLE SELECTION PROCEDURES
Systematic sampling is a commonly used technique if a complete and up-to-date sampling frame is made available. We shall first discuss these sample selection procedures before we evaluate their advantages and disadvantages.
4.2.1 Linear Systematic Sampling
As mentioned above, a common procedure is the linear systematic sampling scheme. We suppose that the population is linearly ordered in some way such that units can be referred to by number, without ambiguity. Further, let  be expressible in the form  and let the selected random number be  (),  being called the sampling interval. In this procedure, the sample comprises the units, . The technique will generate  systematic samples with equal probability which may be shown in the schematic diagram given below:
Table 4.2.1 Schematic diagram showing  systematic samples in the population

Another practical situation is that  is not expressible in the form . In this case, the present sampling scheme will give rise to samples of unequal size,  is taken as an integer nearest to . Then a random number is chosen from 1 to  and every th unit is drawn in the sample. Under this condition, the sample size is not necessarily  and in some cases it may be . For example, if , , then the value of  is 3 and possible samples are ;  and , which are not of the same size. We shall discuss an improvement over it in the next section.
4.2.2 Circular Systematic Sampling
To overcome the difficulty of varying sample size under the situation , the procedure is modified slightly by which a sample of constant size is always obtained. The procedure consists in selecting a unit, by a random start, from 1 to  and then thereafter selecting every th unit,  being an integer nearest to , in a circular manner, until a sample of  units is obtained. This technique is generally known as circular systematic sampling. Suppose that a unit with random number  is selected. The sample will then consist of the units corresponding to the serial numbers

for .
It can be easily verified that every unit has got an equal probability of selection  in this method.
As an illustration, let , and . Then .
The possible samples are, therefore,

; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and .
Further, it will be seen that systematic sampling has the drawback of not yielding an unbiased estimate of sampling variance with single sample. To overcome this difficulty, a new systematic sampling procedure has been suggested by Singh and Singh (1977), which we shall explain in Section 4.9 of this chapter.
4.3 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
The main advantage of systematic sampling is its simplicity of selection, operational convenience and even spread of the sample over the population. It has, therefore, been found very useful in forest surveys for estimating the volume of timber, in fisheries for estimating the total catch of fish, in milk yield surveys for estimation of the lactation yield, etc. Another advantage is that, except for populations with periodicities, systematic sampling provides an efficient estimate as compared to alternative designs. Sometimes systematic sampling variances are much smaller than the variances for random selection of units within strata.
In case of periodicity in the population, systematic sampling has to be used with considerable care. If, for periodic population, sampling interval is an odd multiple of half the period of the cycle, systematic sampling provides zero variance. When the sampling interval is a simple multiple of the period of the cycle, systematic sampling is no better than selecting one unit at random. A serious disadvantage of systematic sampling lies in its use with populations having unforeseen periodicity which may substantially contribute bias to the estimate of the population mean value. Another disadvantage concerns the drawback of estimating the sampling variance of estimators with single sample.
4.4 ESTIMATION OF MEAN AND ITS SAMPLING VARIANCE
Let  denote the th member of the th systematic sample, (; ). The mean of the th sample may be denoted by . We have to consider the problem of estimating the population mean under two different situations: (i) when  and (ii) when . First we shall discuss the situation when .
Theorem 4.4.1: In systematic sampling with interval , sample mean  is an unbiased estimator of the population mean . Its sampling variance is given by

where  denotes the mean square between the column means in the population ( stands for column).
Proof: Since the probability of selection of the th systematic sample is , we have

Hence,  is an unbiased estimator.
If the th sample is considered the th column, the total sum of squares due to column means is given by

Hence, the variance of the sample means  is given by

It should not be inferred from the above formula that the variance of systematic sample mean will decrease if the sample size is increased. This makes the point clear that systematic sampling is a delicate device and should be used carefully.
Theorem 4.4.2: The sampling variance of sample mean  is given by

where

with , and  has its usual meaning.
Proof: We know that the total sum of squares is given by

Also, we know that the variance of  is

and

Hence,

Since  is fixed for a given population, it is obvious from this result that in order to reduce  it is necessary to increase the within-sample variation.
4.5 COMPARISON OF SYSTEMATIC WITH RANDOM SAMPLING
The relative efficiency of systematic sampling in comparison with simple random sampling can be studied by considering the intra-class correlation coefficient. It can be shown that

where  is the intra-class correlation between the units of the same systematic sample and is defined by

From relation (4.5.1) it can be seen that a positive correlation between units in the same sample inflates the sampling variance of the estimate. The increase is quite significant even for small positive correlation because of the term . Since  is fixed for a given population, it is clear from the above relation that an arrangement with the largest possible negative value of  should be preferred. This again leads to the same conclusion that the units within the same systematic sample should be as heterogeneous as possible with respect to the characteristic under study. Since  is never less than zero,  cannot be less than . Thus the minimum value of  is  and in this case .
The relative precision of systematic sample mean with simple random mean is given by

It can be seen that the relative precision depends on the value of . For , the two methods give estimates of equal precision; for , the estimate based on systematic sample is more precise; while if , it reverses. The maximum value which  can attain is 1, when the relative precision of systematic sampling is given by .
4.6 COMPARISON OF SYSTEMATIC WITH STRATIFIED RANDOM SAMPLING
Let us suppose that the population of  units is divided into  strata corresponding to  rows of the schematic diagram in Table 4.1 and that one unit is drawn randomly from each stratum, thus giving a stratified sample of size . Then the mean of the th stratum is

and the population mean is

Similarly, the stratum mean square of the units within the th stratum (row) is defined by

Hence, the pooled mean square between units within stratum is defined by

Clearly, the variance of the mean of this stratified sample will be

Now we shall express the variance of the systematic sample in a suitable form for a comparative study. Equation (4.4.1) can be written as



where  is a non-circular serial correlation coefficient defined by

Comparing relations (4.6.4) and (4.6.5), we get

Thus we see that the relative precision of systematic sampling over stratified random sampling depends upon the values of . If  is positive then stratified random sampling will provide a better estimate of . However, if , it may be concluded that both systematic sampling and stratified random sampling are equally good.
Example 4.1: Given below are the daily milk yield (in litres) records of the first lactation of a specified cow belonging to the Tharparkar herd maintained at the Government Cattle Farm, Patna. The milk yields of the first five days were not recorded, being the colostrum period.
Table: Daily milk yield records (203 days)

Find the efficiency of systematic sampling with 7 and 14 days' interval of recording, with respect to corresponding simple random sampling, in estimating the lactation yield of the cow.
Hence .
Taking random start , we get the 5th sample.
In this case, the unbiased estimate of the total milk yield is given by

The variance of systematic sampling for the population total estimate is given by

The variance of simple random sample estimate of total milk yield is given by

where 

Thus, the relative precision of systematic sampling over simple random sampling will be

(ii) For  and , we have  or .
Taking a random start , we get the 10th sample. In this case, the unbiased estimate of total milk yield is given by

Its variance is given by

The variance of a simple random sample estimate of total milk yield will be

Therefore, the relative precision of systematic estimate over simple random sample estimate is

4.7 ESTIMATION OF VARIANCE
An unbiased estimate of the variance is not available for a systematic sample with one random start because a systematic sample is regarded as a random sample of one unit (cluster). However, some biased estimators are possible on the basis of a systematic sample. If two or more systematic samples are available, an unbiased estimate of the variance of the estimated mean can be made.
Suppose  independent systematic samples are available, each of size . Then, an unbiased estimate of the variance is given by

where .
An approximate and biased estimate of the variance of a systematic sample mean is given by

where .
Another approximate and biased estimate of variance of a systematic sample mean is given by

These estimators, given by relations (4.7.2) and (4.7.3), are biased and should be used with caution otherwise they may provide misleading results in practice. It is, therefore, desirable to get an idea of the bias in a specific case by comparing it with the sampling variance obtained by using the entire data. These estimators are based on the results given by Cochran (1946) and Yates (1948).
Example 4.2: In an experimental agricultural census carried out by I.A.S.R.I., New Delhi, in the Loni block of Meerut District in U.P. (India) during 1967-68, two villages of the block were selected randomly. Out of 225 holdings in two villages, namely Panch-lok and Agrola, 45 holdings were selected by systematic sampling (with 5 as the sampling interval). The total arable land (in kacha bigha)* for the 45 selected holdings are given below:
Table 4.7.1: Total arable land for selected holdings

*(5 kacha bigha = 1 acre)
Estimate the total arable land in the two villages and also the approximate standard error of the estimate.
An estimate of the total arable land is given by

An estimate of the variance of  is given by



 Estimated standard error of .
4.8 INTERPENETRATING SYSTEMATIC SAMPLING
If it is essential to have a rigorous estimate of the sampling variance, it can be done by taking systematic sub-samples with independent random starts, each containing  units to keep the total sample size the same. Let  be estimates based on  independent systematic sub-samples. An unbiased estimator of the population mean is the pooled mean given by

Then, an unbiased estimate of the variance of  is

In case of  systematic sub-samples of  units, each with random starts from 1 to , the variance and estimated variance of the pooled mean  are

where  is the th sample mean () and

Though these variance estimators are unbiased, they are less precise if  is small. Similarly if  is increased by decreasing the sub-sample size, the combined estimator of the population mean is likely to be less efficient. Hence, one has to arrive at a decision between the desire of getting a good estimate of variance or a good estimate of the population mean.
4.9 NEW SYSTEMATIC SAMPLING*
As pointed out in the previous section, systematic sampling suffers from the drawback of not being able to provide an unbiased estimator of sampling variance on the basis of a single sample. One possible way of getting an unbiased variance estimator is to use interpenetrating systematic sampling, but this results in loss in precision and simplicity. Singh and Singh (1977) have suggested a new systematic sampling procedure which provides an unbiased variance estimator. In this section, we shall discuss briefly the outlines of the main results.
Suppose a population consists of  distinct units and a sample of size  is to be drawn from it. Let  () and  be two predetermined integers which are chosen in such a way that (i) every sample contains distinct units, and (ii) the inclusion probability for each pair of units is non-zero. Starting with a random number , we select  units continuously, and thereafter the remaining  units with interval  such that  and . With these restrictions, a sample of desired sample size  can be drawn in two or more phases by this sampling scheme. Here the term 'phase' is used in the sense that the ultimate sample of the given size is selected in stages. The number of phases  required for selecting a sample of  units from a population of size  is given by

The sample space corresponding to the selection procedure contains  possible samples, and the sample point corresponding to the random number  is given by  where  consists of the unit indices  () and  consists of the unit indices  ().
The probability of selecting each sample is , and thus, the probability measure associated with the selection procedure is given by

Thus, the inclusion probabilities for individual units and pairwise units are given by  and , which are known under the new systematic sampling procedure. Hence, the Horvitz-Thompson estimator of the population mean simplifies to

The sampling variance of the estimator  in Yates-Grundy form reduces to

which can be written as

where .
An unbiased estimator of  can be obtained by

In a comparative study, the efficiency of the new systematic sampling over the usual systematic sampling and simple random sampling has been examined by considering different types of populations. It was concluded, in this study, that for many natural populations, new systematic sampling provides better results than the usual systematic sampling.
*May be omitted at the first reading.
4.10 COMPARISON OF SYSTEMATIC WITH SIMPLE AND STRATIFIED RANDOM SAMPLES FOR SOME SPECIFIED POPULATIONS
The performance of systematic sampling in relation to stratified or simple random sampling depends very much on the nature of the population in which the characteristic under study has some simple trend in terms of units alone. Some main trends are discussed here as under.
4.10.1 Populations with Linear Trend
Suppose the values of the population units increase in accordance with a linear model such that

where  and  are constants and  goes from 1 to .
Hence

and

Therefore

Similarly, to find variance within strata, we have to put  for , and we get

For systematic sampling, the values can be put in Eqn. (4.3.2)

which proves

It is seen that the variance of a stratified sample is only th of the variance of a systematic sample in a population with linear trend. Similarly, the variance of a systematic sample is approximately th of the variance of a random sample. Hence, stratified sampling is the most efficient of all the methods for eliminating the effect of linear trend. The performance of systematic sampling in the presence of a linear trend can be improved by applying the end corrections given by Yates (1948) or the modified method of Singh et al (1968), which chooses pairs of units equidistant from the ends of the population.
4.10.2 Populations with Periodic Variations
Suppose the population consists of a periodic trend which is represented by

where  varies from 0 to an integral multiple of . Assuming , successive sampling units will repeat themselves after every 20th value.
A five per cent systematic sample from such a population will consist of sampling units drawn from the same position of each cycle. An estimate from such a sample will be as good as a single value. On the other hand, a five per cent random sample will contain units from different parts of the population and estimates from such samples will be more precise for the effect of a periodic trend. If we select 10 per cent systematic sample, then the estimate will be as good as the population value, thus making systematic sampling the most precise of all sampling methods. Thus, the precision of systematic sampling from populations having a periodic trend depends upon the periodicity. The most favourable case occurs when  is an odd multiple of the half period.
4.10.3 Natural Populations
Systematic sampling is both operationally convenient and efficient in sampling some natural populations like forest areas for estimating the volume of timber, hardwood seedlings, areas under different types of covers, etc. Osborne (1942), Yates (1948) and Finney (1948, 1950) have examined the relative efficiency of systematic sampling in certain natural populations and observed that performance of systematic sampling had been comparatively better.
4.10.4 Auto-correlated Populations
It has already been observed that the efficiency of systematic sampling in comparison with simple random sampling or stratified sampling depends upon the nature of the population. In various natural populations, units close to each other are more alike than units far apart. For the study of such populations, called auto-correlated populations, we assume that the observations  and  () are positively correlated and the serial correlation coefficient  is a function of the distance in between, i.e. . Suppose the units  are drawn from an infinite population (called super population) with mean  and variance , then

and

for  and 
where

The graph of  as a function of  is called a correlogram. It has been observed that  increases as  decreases. Madow and Madow (1944) have shown that if the units in the population are ordered, then it is enough to adopt systematic sampling instead of simple random sampling. Cochran (1946) has shown that if, besides the assumptions taken in Eqn. (4.10.5), it is assumed that

for all ,
then

The condition, , about the second difference of serial correlation coefficients, implies that the correlogram is concave upwards, and for such populations systematic sampling is more efficient than stratified sampling.
Singh et al (1968) have discussed different cases, viz.

(i) population with linear trend plus random element,
(ii) population with linear trend and periodic variation, and
(iii) population with parabolic trend,
and they have shown that the performance of modified systematic sampling over stratified or simple random sampling is quite satisfactory.
4.11 TWO-DIMENSIONAL SYSTEMATIC SAMPLING
So far we have discussed one-dimensional systematic sampling in which the population units are supposed to be serially ordered on a line. There are many situations where the population units are naturally arranged on an area or a plane instead of a line. A systematic sampling procedure for such a situation is known as plane systematic or two-dimensional systematic sampling. The simplest extension of a linear systematic sample to the two-dimensional plane is popularly known as a squared grid or aligned sample. Quenouille (1949) and Das (1950) have discussed the problem of two-dimensional systematic sampling at length. In this section, we describe briefly a procedure for selecting a two-dimensional systematic sample.
Let us assume that the population consists of  square (or rectangular) grid areas of equal size and a sample of  grid areas is to be taken. Also assume that the grids are arranged in  () form of cells and each cell is arranged in the form of  rows and  columns. The simplest way is to select a pair of random numbers  such that , . Thus, the random location of a grid in the cell is determined uniquely. A systematic sample selected by this procedure is an aligned or square-grid sample and the selected grids are shown by the dots in Fig. 4.3 (a).
Another procedure is as follows: the grids are arranged in the form of  rows and  columns and it is required to select a systematic sample of size  grids.
Select  independent random numbers , each less than or equal to ; and  independent random numbers , each less than or equal to . The grids included in the sample are,  for  and .
A sample selected by this procedure is known as an unaligned sample and the selected grid points are shown by the dots in Fig. 4.3(b).
Investigations given by Quenouille (1949) and Das (1950) indicated that an unaligned pattern will be superior both to a square grid and a stratified random sample. Milne (1959) has proposed a central square grid technique in which the sample point lies at the centre of the square. A two- and three-dimensional lattice sampling technique has been discussed by Yates (1960).
SET OF PROBLEMS
4.1 What is systematic sampling? Give the circumstances under which it is to be preferred to simple random sampling. Explain how you will estimate the variance of a systematic sample with a random start.
4.2 Describe 'linear' and 'circular' systematic sampling procedures and discuss briefly their advantages and disadvantages. In a finite population of size , show that systematic sampling will be more efficient than random sampling with equal probability, wor, if the intra-class correlation coefficient

4.3 Discuss the situations under which systematic samples are preferred to other types of samples in censuses and surveys. Show that a systematic sample mean is a more efficient estimator of the population mean than a simple random mean, but less efficient than a stratified random sample mean in a population with linear trend.
4.4 Describe precisely the procedure of drawing a systematic sample of  units from a population of  units, where  is not necessarily a multiple of . (i) How would you estimate the mean of a characteristic in the population and examine its unbiasedness? (ii) How would you combine the estimates from three systematic samples of size  into a single pooled estimate which is unbiased and estimate its standard error?
4.5 In a two-dimensional population with  units, the linear trend is given by  (), where  is the item value in the th row and th column.
A systematic square grid sample of  units is taken by taking two independent random starts  each between 0 and  and  for . Show that the mean of this sample has the same precision as the sample mean of size  (Cochran, 1977).
REFERENCES
Cochran, W.G., "Comparison of methods for determining stratum boundaries", Bull. Int. Statist. Inst., 38, 345-358, (1961).
Das, M.N., "On the relative efficiency of systematic sampling", Ann. Math. Statist., 21, 456-460, (1950).
Finney, D.J., "On the efficiency of systematic sampling", J. Agric. Sci., 38, 190-196, (1948). "The efficiency of systematic sampling in practice", J. Agric. Sci., 40, 207-216, (1950).
Madow, W.G., "On the theory of systematic sampling", Ann. Math. Statist., 14, 333-354, (1943). "On the theory of systematic sampling II", Ann. Math. Statist., 20, 1-18, (1949). "On the theory of systematic sampling III", Ann. Math. Statist., 24, 101-106, (1953).
Madow, W.G. and L.H. Madow, "On the theory of systematic sampling", Ann. Math. Statist., 15, 1-24, (1944).
Milne, A., "The centric systematic area-sample treated as a random sample", Ann. Math. Statist., 30, 207-216, (1959).
Osborne, J.G., "Efficiency of systematic sampling in a forest survey", J. Forestry, 40, 865-869, (1942).
Quenouille, M.H., "On the comparison of systematic and random sampling", Ann. Math. Statist., 20, 456-460, (1949).
Singh, D., F.S. Chaudhary and R.K. Singh, "A modified systematic sampling procedure", Biometrics, 24, 699-704, (1968).
Singh, R. and S. Singh, "A new systematic sampling procedure", Biometrical Journal, 19, 351-356, (1977).
Sukhatme, P.V., B.V. Sukhatme and S. Sukhatme, Sampling Theory of Surveys with Applications, Iowa State University Press, Ames, Iowa, (1984).
Yates, F., "Systematic sampling", Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, Series A, 241, 345-377, (1948). Sampling Methods for Censuses and Surveys, Charles Griffin & Co., London, (1960).