1. Introduction to Sampling
What is Sampling?
Sampling is not mere substitution of a partial coverage for a total coverage. Sampling is the science and art of controlling and measuring reliability of useful statistical information through the theory of probability.
Types of Data: The data on needs and resources may be classified into two groups.
Survey data, comprising of data already in existence which are collected and recorded by observation or enquiry.
Experimental data: Data which can only be obtained through well designed and controlled statistical experiments.
Survey data can further grouped into three classes:
Levels and relationship of characteristics at a point of time or during a period of time.
Knowledge of trends and relationship among characteristics over time.
Data which are fairly stable over time.
Sampling Unit:
A sampling unit or elementary unit or simply a unit is an element or a group of elements, on which observations can be made or from which the required statistical information can be ascertained according to a well defined procedure. 
Example of units are Person, family household, farm, a period of time such as hour, day etc. Elementary units or groups of such units, which besides being already defined, identifiable and observable, are convenient for purpose of sampling are called sampling units.
Population:
The collection of all units of a specified type in a given region at particular point of time is termed as a population. Population may be finite or infinite according as the no of units in it is finite or infinite. A part or segment of a population, for each of which the required statistical information is to be obtained separately for the specific purpose are formed which form the domain of study.
Sample: A part or fraction of the population is said to constitute a sample, or a finite sub set of the population statistical individuals is called a sample.
Parameter: Any function of the values of all the population units is known as parameter. These values are constant e.g. population mean, population variance. Population total or Any quantity based on population observations is called parameter.
Statistic: A quantity which is based on sample observations is known as statistic. e.g. sample total, sample mean, sample variance.
Estimator & Estimate: An estimator is a statistic obtained by specified procedure for estimating population parameters. It is a random variable and differ from sample to sample. A particular value which an estimator takes for a given sample is known as estimate.
An estimator  for population parameter  is said to be unbiased for  if its expected value equal to , i.e., . Then it is said to be unbiased, otherwise if  then it is biased.

Primary Data: Data collected for first time by an investigator or a person working under him. It is more reliable, time consuming and costly.
Secondary data: The data collected by some person or agency in the past for their own use. These are available in reports, news paper, magazines, records of the department. They are cheap, less time consuming and less reliable.
Census vs. Sample Survey
Complete Enumeration:Total counts of all units of a population for certain characteristic is known as complete enumeration or census survey. The money, manpower and time required for complete enumeration will generally be large and in some limited situations the complete enumeration is not possible.
Sample survey:When some of units selected in a suitable manner from population are surveyed and an inference is drawn on the basis of survey units about the population it is called sample survey. It is less expensive, less time consuming.
Advantages: 
Less cost of survey 
Greater speed of getting the results 
Greater scope 
Adaptability.
Types of Surveys:
Ad hoc Survey: Survey done with the intention not to repeat it and these are carried out to estimate the population parameters.
Repeating Survey: The surveys which are carried out at a regular interval of time. These surveys are used to study the trends. N.S.S.O (National Sample Survey Organisation) carries out the survey at regular interval of time.
Errors:
Sampling Errors: Sampling errors have their origin in sampling and they are due to the fact that only a portion of population is used to estimate the population parameter and for drawing the inference about the population. These errors are absent in complete enumeration. Sampling errors are decreased with an increase in sample size and decrease inversely proportional to square root of the sample size.
Non-sampling Errors: Errors which are arising at the stage of ascertainment and processing of data are termed as non-sampling errors. Non-sampling errors are increased with the increase in sample size and is present in both complete enumeration as well as sample survey.
Sampling Methods and Frame
Random Sample: Random sample is a sample drawn from the population in such a way that each unit in the population has a pre-determined probability of selection.
Simple Random Samples: If each unit in the population has equal probability of selection then it is called SRS and the sampling procedure is called simple random sampling.
Non-Random Sample: A sample selected not according to the law of chance is known as non-random sample.
Judgement or Purposive Sample: A non-random sample drawn using certain amount of judgement to get a representative sample is known as purposive or judgement sample. In purposive sampling the units are selected on the basis of some auxiliary information to ensure a reflection of population in the sample. It is cheap, less time consuming, operationally convenient, sometimes more accurate when some confidential information is to be collected.
Sampling Frame: For using sampling methods for the collection of data, it is essential to have a frame of all the sampling units of the population to be studied with proper identification. Such a frame is termed as a sampling frame.
Simple Random Sampling with and Without Replacement:
SRSWR: When the units in a sample are allowed to repeat in the sample then it is termed as SRSWR. Suppose we have a population of size  and a sample of  is selected with replacement then there are  possible samples and each of them will be selected with probability .
SRSWOR: When units are not allowed to repeat in the sample then it is called SRSWOR. In SRSWOR, with a population size , samples of  can be drawn in  ways each with probability of selection is .
Estimators and Estimates:
Estimator: It is a statistic used to estimate the population parameter. 
Estimate: It is the specific value of the estimator based on sample observations for a given sample. 
Properties of Good Estimator:
It should be unbiased.
It should be consistent.
It should be efficient.
It should be sufficient.
Unbiased: An estimator '' for some population parameter  is said to be unbiased for  if  and if  then it is said to be biased estimator of  and Bias is given by 

Consistent: An estimator  based on a sample size  is said to be consistent for  if   as  is large i.e. 

Efficient: An estimator is said to be more efficient than another estimator for parameter  if  where  is known as mean square error of estimator.
Prove that 
Proof: 




If unbiased, .
Sufficient: An estimator  based on  sample observations is said to be sufficient for  if it contains all the information about . Let  be the sample observations then 

Point and Interval Estimation:
Point estimation: When an estimator is given by a single value it is called point estimation. e.g. 

Interval estimation: When the estimates are given in range with certain degree of confidence then it is called interval estimation. e.g.  with 95% level of confidence. Interval estimation are preferred over point estimation because point estimation does not indicate the degree of confidence. Interval estimation results are more correct than point estimators.


Simple Random Sampling: Mathematical Derivations
Simple Random Sampling is the most commonly used sampling scheme.  In this sampling, the units are selected from the population with equal probability of selection.  Efficiency of all sampling schemes is compared with SRS because it is the standard sampling scheme. 
Notations: Let us suppose that a sample of size  is selected from a population of size .
1) Let  be the population units.
2)  be the values / observation on these  units.
3)  be the sample units.
4)  be the value of sample units.
5)  Sample Mean.
6) . (Note: Unbiased sample variance is usually ,  definition follows later).
7)  sampling fraction.
8)  raising fraction.
9)  finite population correction (f.p.c). When  is large as compared to ,  and for large samples .
10) .
11) , .
A. SRSWR (With Replacement)
Theorem: Prove that in SRSWR there are  possible samples each with probability of selection .
Proof: In SRSWR the units are allowed to repeat in the sample. So, every time at each draw unit is selected out of  units.
1st unit is drawn in  ways.
2nd unit is drawn in  ways.
Selection of sample of size  is drawn in . Since each unit drawn from the population of size  and replacement of units are allowed then every unit is selected out of  units.
Probability of selecting 1st unit = .
Probability of selecting 2nd unit = .
Probability of selecting  unit = .
Probability of selection of a sample =  ways.
Theorem: Prove that in SRSWR sample mean is unbiased estimator of population mean.
Proof: We know that 


Since :

Theorem: In SRSWR .
Proof: 




Since draws are independent, .

Theorem: Show that in SRSWR the unbiased estimator of  is  where 
Proof: Let us consider:



We know that 
Similarly 
Substituting these back:


Therefore, 
So  is an unbiased estimator of .
But , so unbiased estimator of  is 

and 

Unbiased estimator of population total (SRSWR):



Unbiased estimator 


95% C.I. for population total: 

B. SRSWOR (Without Replacement)
Theorem: Prove that in SRSWOR the probability of selection of sample of size  from a population of size  is  and such samples are .
Proof: Since units are not allowed to repeat:
1st unit is selected out of  units in  ways.
Probability of selection of 1st unit is .
Probability of selection of 2nd unit is .
Probability of selection of 3rd unit is .
Probability of selection of  unit is .
Probability of selection of a sample of size 

Out of  units we want to select the samples of size . There are  no. of samples of size .
Theorem: Show that in SRSWOR  is unbiased estimator of population mean.
Proof: 

where  is  sample mean and  is the probability of selection of  sample.

Where  Grand total of  samples.
Now each of the population unit  appears in  of all possible samples.


Now 


 is unbiased estimator of .
Theorem: Show that in SRSWOR 
Proof: We know that 



Now 
Putting in above we have:

Any population unit  can occur in  samples.

And any pair of units can occur in  samples.

From identity, 


Substituting these values:





Different forms: We know that 



Unbiased Estimator of  in SRSWOR:
We know that 



 is estimated by , i.e., .
 is estimated by .
Since 
Putting in equation, we get:





In SRSWR  is unbiased estimator of . In SRSWOR  is unbiased estimator of .
Estimation of Pop Totals (SRSWOR):
We know that in SRSWOR  and population total .



 C.I. for pop Mean: 
 C.I. for pop totals: 

Example:Given: , . Mean revenue . Sum of squares . 
Sample Variance: . 
95% CI for Mean: . (Correcting the arithmetic: ). 
Estimate of Total Revenue: . 
95% CI for Total: . 
Here is the transcription of the second document, covering simple random sampling for proportions, sample size estimation, and the relative efficiency of SRS methods.
5. Sampling for Proportion
This technique is used when the data is classified to two groups or categories: individuals possessing a particular characteristic (belong to class C) and individuals do not possessing a particular characteristic (does not belong to class C).
In these situations, to estimate the population proportion of units belonging to a class or to estimate the total no. of units belonging to a category we need sampling for proportion. The selection procedure is same as that of SRSWR or SRSWOR but estimation procedure is different.
Examples: Family (Big/Small, Joint/Nuclear, Rich/Poor), Individuals (Smoker/Non-Smoker), Farm (Irrigated/Non-Irrigated), Plants (Damaged/Not Damaged).
Suppose we draw a sample of size  from population of size . Let  be no of units out of  belong to a particular category. Then the proportion of unit belonging to a category
Let  be the value of  unit possessing a characteristic belonging to a category then define:
 if  (Belong to a class C).
 if  (does not belong to class C).
Let  be the total no. of units in population belonging to C. .
Proportion of Units belonging to .

Theorem: In SRS sample proportion  is unbiased estimator of Population proportion.
Proof: We know that  (Population Mean).
Now  if it belongs to C,  if it doesn't.
 Total no of units belong to C.
Likewise in sample, sample mean 
Now in SRS or SRSWOR  is unbiased estimator of , therefore  is unbiased estimator of .
 and .
Theorem: Find the variance of ,  and its unbiased estimator.
Proof: Let us consider:


Now in sampling for proportion:
If , .
If , .

Putting in (1) we have:
Likewise considering 

Case 1: SRSWOR 
We know that .
And unbiased estimator of 

Estimation of total no of elements is  which is unbiased estimator of  i.e. .

And unbiased estimator of 
95% C.I. for pop proportion is 
95% C.I. for pop total is 

Case 2: SRSWR 
When the sample is drawn by SRSWR:
And unbiased estimator of 

Procedures of Drawing a Simple Random Sample
1. Lottery Method
Assign  numbers to  population units.
Prepare  chits with nos. .
Mix the chits thoroughly and draw one chit at a time. Draw the numbers one by one with or without replacement as the case may be.
The units corresponding to which these  numbers belong stand selected.
2. Association of one random number to each unit
Let  be a '' digit number. Associate '' digit numbers to each of the  units using a random number table.
Select a '' digit number () from the random number table.
If , select it.
If , reject the draw and select the next '' digit number.
Continue this process until a sample of size  is completed, either with or without replacement.
Probability analysis: Out of  '' digit numbers, the probability of selecting a specific unit in a draw is . Only  numbers lead to selection, and  leads to rejection. Probability of rejection = . Since the probability of selection remains the same, the system leads to SRS.
Limitation: When  is large, a large number of draws will be rejected, which is a waste of time and resources.
Association of several numbers to each unit
Let  be a '' digit number. Let  be the highest '' digit multiple of , such that  is a  digit number. Associate  numbers to each unit as follows:
Unit 1: 
Unit 2: 

Unit : 
Total numbers used = .
Select a '' digit number () from  to . Let  be the number selected. If , find the remainder  when  is divided by  (or subtract the highest possible multiple of  so the remainder lies between  to ). Select unit . If , reject the draw.
Probability analysis: Total numbers leading to selection is . Numbers associated with each unit = . Probability of selection of a unit . Hence, the system leads to SRS. The probability of rejection is . Since  is very large (close to ), the probability of rejection is small.
4. Simple Random Sampling from a population with an old sampling frame
This technique is used when the sampling frame is not very old. It involves minor changes (omissions and additions) rather than major ones. Using the old frame cuts down the cost and time required to obtain a new one.
Let's assume there are  units in the old sampling frame, out of which  units are omitted or non-existent, and  new units are added. Associate numbers from  to  to these units. Select a random number .
If  and points to a valid unit, select it. If it points to an omitted unit, reject the draw.
If , reject the draw and take a fresh random number.
Continue until a sample of size  is completed.
Modifications to reduce rejection:
Case 1 (when ): Allot numbers to the new units replacing the omitted ones. The number of remaining non-existent units is . Select a random number  from  to . If  corresponds to a valid unit, select it. Probability of rejection is much smaller: .
Case 2 (when ): The  new units are assigned numbers.  of these take the slots of the omitted units. The remaining  units are assigned new numbers . Select a number from  to .
Cost Function and Sample Size Estimation
Cost Function:A function which assigns the total cost of survey to different types of costs is called cost function. In a sampling scheme cost is a function of sample size (), overhead cost (), cost of the unit (), variance in the unit () and sampling scheme.
.
Cost function of SRS:
Let  be the total cost of the survey. .
If  and  are known to use then sample size  can be obtained as: .
Estimation of sample size in SRS:
In SRS, as sample size increases the precision also increases but on the other hand cost of survey will also increases. So, we have to estimate the sample size by making a compromise between these two.
Case I: When cost function is given. 
Case II: When Permissible error and level of confidence are given.
Permissible Error: It is the maximum difference between estimated value and actual value of the parameter which we are willing to tolerate.
Let us suppose that  is the permissible error for estimation i.e. .
And  is the level of confidence. 

 Also, we know that  C.I for  is .

Comparing (1) and (2) we have:




Let .

Where  is the first approximation of sample size.
Example:
, , , .
,  (or 1.96).
Using .
Final sample size needed: 
Estimation of Sample Size for Proportion:


Let .




Relative Efficiency
Relative efficiency of SRSWOR as compared to SRSWR:
We know that in SRSWOR, .
And in SRSWR, .
The Relative Efficiency (R.E.) of SRSWOR with respect to SRSWR is:

Since , , so .
This implies , meaning SRSWOR is more precise than SRSWR. In SRSWOR, a better representative of population units is given in the sample as compared to SRSWR.
Stratified Sampling
In stratified sampling, the population is divided into strata which are homogeneous in themselves and heterogeneous from each other with respect to a suitably chosen auxiliary variable , which is highly correlated with the variable under study. These strata are considered as sub-populations.
The samples are drawn independently from each stratum. These strata and samples are drawn independently from the strata, and estimates for the population are obtained by suitably combining strata estimates.
This sampling scheme is used when the population is heterogeneous and to give a proper representation to different categories or groups. These groups are considered as strata. In general, stratified sampling is more precise than SRS.
Criteria for Selecting Auxiliary Variable :
It should be cheap and easy to collect.
It should be highly correlated with the variable under study.
Population total, i.e., , should be known.

Variables:
 value of  unit in  strata.
.
.
Population Mean 
Population Mean of  strata 

Strata variance 
Let  be the sample sizes drawn from strata .
Let  be the value of  unit from the sample drawn from the  stratum, where  and .
Sample mean 
Sample variance

Theorem: Show that in stratified sampling  is unbiased estimator of population mean where  and .
Proof: Let us assume that samples are drawn by SRSWOR for different strata.

Since samples are drawn independently and each strata behave like a population, 


 is unbiased estimator of .
Variance:





When  is very large: 

Unbiased Estimator of :
In stratified sampling, each stratum behaves like a population with samples drawn independently via SRSWR or SRSWOR. In SRSWOR,  is an unbiased estimator of . Therefore,  is an unbiased estimator of .

Estimation of Population Total:
Variance of estimated population total:

Estimated variance of estimated population total:

Confidence Intervals:
C.I. for Population Mean :  
C.I. for Population Total :  
Situations Under Which Stratified Sampling is Used:
When the population sampling frame is available in the form of sub-frames, then sub-frames can be used as strata.
When the results are required not only for the population but also for strata.
When different information is available for different strata, then different sampling designs are used for different strata.
When the survey organization has offices in different zones, these zones can be taken as strata.
When the population is heterogeneous and divided into different groups or categories which are homogeneous in themselves.
Points Under Consideration in Stratified Sampling:
Number of strata.
Demarcation of strata.
Allocation of sample size to various strata.
Selection of auxiliary variable () or stratification variable.  should be cheap, easy to collect, and highly correlated with the variable under study.
Number of Strata: Larger the number of strata, higher the precision. Dalenius (1953) showed that in most stratified sampling from populations, this relation holds:

Since , 
Since two units are required to be selected from each strata in order to get the unbiased estimator of , this restricts the maximum number of strata we can have.
Demarcation of Strata:
In addition to the number of strata, the variance  also depends upon the points of demarcation of strata. For dividing the population, we need  as the points of demarcation. A set of optimum points of stratification is one which minimizes the  keeping all other factors fixed.
Allocation of Sample Size in different strata:
Following points should be consider for allocation: 1) Strata size () 2) Variability in stratum () 3) Cost of taking observation for sampling units in different strata ().
1) Equal allocation 2) Proportional Allocation 3) Optimum Allocation.
Proportional Allocation:
Case I: When only strata size is known. Select sample size proportional to strata size i.e.


Case II: When strata variance is also known. 


Case III: Neyman Allocation. If cost of survey per unit from different strata () is also given then 



Cost Function of Stratified Sampling:
If  is the overhead cost and  be the cost of survey per unit from each stratum, then the cost function is given by:

Theorem: Prove that in proportional allocation .
Proof: We know that 
Under proportional allocation 




Optimum Allocation:
Theorem: Show that in optimum allocation in stratified sampling .
Proof: Let us define Lagrange's multiplier .


Differentiating w.r.t : 


Taking the summation: 
Dividing:

Determination of Sample Size under Optimum Allocation:
Case I: When cost is fixed and we want to minimize the variance.

Substituting , we get 

Case II: When variance is fixed and we minimize the cost.

Substituting , we get 

Theorem: If f.p.c are ignored then show that .
Proof:



We know that:




Ignoring f.p.c.:

Dividing by :


Now:



Which is a positive quantity, so 
Combining these two results we have: 


Multiple Stratification or Deep Stratification:
In multi-subject surveys, when all the characters under study are related to a common auxiliary variable , then stratification is done according to auxiliary variable . But in many situations, the characters under study are related to different auxiliary variables. In such situations, first stratification is done according to the first auxiliary variable, then further stratification is done on the second auxiliary variable, and so on. Such stratification is called multiple or deep stratification.
Post Stratification:
This technique of stratification is used when stratification was not planned initially and the sample is drawn from the population by SRS or some other sampling techniques. But later on, it was thought necessary to have the results not only for the population but also for samples. Then the selected sample is divided into a number of strata, and the modified estimator based on post strata  is used.
Quota Sampling:
In quota sampling, the population is divided into a number of groups or strata depending upon the geographical conditions. The sample size for each stratum is obtained by proportional allocation: . The units from each stratum are selected not by the law of chance but as per operational convenience. Hence, it differs from stratified sampling.
Varying Probability Sampling (PPS)
In many situations when the units under study have unequal sizes and contribute unequally to the population then instead of selecting units in equal probability the units are selected with varying probability i.e. larger units are given more chance of selection. This method is likely to be more precise than SRS.
In PPS, sampling size  is the value of auxiliary variable which is highly correlated with variable under study.
Prob of selection of  unit 


Theorem: Results show that in PPS  is unbiased estimator of population total .

Let  unit of sample be the  unit of population then:

Variance in PPS:



Unbiased estimator:

Methods of Selecting PPS Samples:
Cumulative Total Method: We associate numbers to the population units according to their cumulative size. If a random number  from  to  is selected, the unit to which this  belongs stands selected.
Drawbacks: This method involves cumulative totals which are very difficult to compute for large .
Lahiri's Method: This method does not involve the cumulation of sizes. Let . Select a random number  from  to , and a random number  from  to . If , then select the  unit; if , reject the draw.
Drawbacks: If some units have larger sizes compared to other units,  will be large, which results in more draws leading to rejection, hence it is time-consuming and costly.
Split Method: To overcome Lahiri's drawback, one or two units with larger sizes are split into two or more units with smaller sizes. This automatically reduces  and the probability of rejection.
PPS Sampling When the Frame is a Map: If the frame consists of maps showing boundaries, select a random number  from  to  and  from  to  (the limits of the map axes). Plot point  on the map. If it falls in a unit, that unit stands selected.
Systematic Sampling:
In systematic sampling, only one unit is selected at random and the remaining units in the sample get automatically selected by giving equal spacing in the population. To select a sample of size  from a population of size , we find the sampling interval  and select a random start  from  to . The units selected are .
Advantages: Samples are well spread over the entire population and hence systematic sampling is in general more precise than SRS. Operationally more convenient and less costly.
Limitations: Two consecutive units cannot be selected; hence we cannot find the unbiased estimator of the variance of the estimated mean.
Ratio Estimators
Upper Bound of Ratio of Bias of :
Theorem: Prove that . (Note: User's notes say ).
Proof: We know that:

Also 





Bias in 



Now since :

Theorem: If  for all values of  in a finite population then ratio estimator is unbiased.
Proof: Since the relationship between  and  is linear and the line of regression passes through origin then  here .
Summing over all values of population units and divide by :



Averaging over sample units: .


Since  can be hold constant for some set of value of :

From above we have :

Ratio estimator  is unbiased estimator of .
Regression Estimators
Like ratio estimators, regression estimators are used to increase the precision by making use of auxiliary variable and are used when the relationship between  and  is linear but does not pass through origin.
The regression estimators are in general more precise than ratio estimators and SRS particularly when the line of regression of  on  does not pass through origin.
Regression estimator of population mean:
where  is the estimate of regression coefficient of  on .
Case I: when . then
 which is an estimator of population mean in SRS.
 SRS is a particular case of Regression estimator when .
Case-II: when 
 (Note: Typo in handwritten notes corrected to standard form)
Here ratio estimator is a particular case of regression estimator when .
Like ratio estimator, regression estimators are biased but for large sample they are approximately unbiased.
Regression Estimation: when value of  is pre-assigned then show that regression estimator are unbiased and .
Proof: when  then
.
 is unbiased.

Let 
.
.
Now in SRSWOR .
.
.
Theorem: If the value of  then  is minimum. and the minimum variance will be .
Proof:
Let  and we want to show that  is minimum when .
We know that
Put 
 --- (1)
 is minimum when .
 has minimum variance when  i.e. .
Now putting the value of  in (1):
.
.
Comparisons of SRS, Ratio and Regression Estimators.
SRS:  --- (1)
 --- (2)
 --- (3)
From (1) and (3), since :
.
Hence regression estimator are more efficient than SRS except when  i.e. there is no correlation between  and .
From (1) and (2):
 or .
If the  is greater than twice the  then SRS will be more precise but if  which is a...
From (2) and (3):
Regression estimator will be more precise than Ratio estimator if
Which is true. except when .
 which hold true when line of regression passes through the origin.
Hence when line of regression passes through origin then ratio and regression estimator are equally precise. Otherwise, regression estimator is more precise.
Role of Auxiliary information in sampling:
Auxiliary variable: For studying a variable , we collect data for each unit in sample for variable . This variable is called auxiliary, additional or supplementary variable.
Criterion for selecting auxiliary variable:
It should be cheap, and easy to collect readily available.
It should be highly correlated with the variable under study.
The population size i.e.  should be known.
Use of auxiliary variable in different stages.
Primary Stage: In stratified sampling auxiliary variable is used to make strata to improve estimator.
Selection Stage: In PPS sampling units are selected with probability proportional to size i.e. . Hence auxiliary variables are used at selection stage.
At Estimation stage: In ratio and regression estimator method of estimation, auxiliary variable  is used out to improve the estimator by using modified estimator like ratio estimator of  i.e.  and Regression estimator of  i.e. . Although samples are selected by SRS or other sampling schemes but auxiliary variable are used to improve the estimator at estimation stage.
Product Method of Estimation
In ratio method of estimation:

These are called ratio estimator because they use the ratios of two variables  and . Ratio estimators are more precise than SRS when  i.e. when correlation between  and  is +ve and if when correlation between  and  is -ve then ratio estimator are less precise than SRS.
In the situation when there is a -ve correlation between  and  instead of using ratio method of estimation we use product method of estimation.
Product estimator of population total .
Since we are using the product of two estimators for estimation of population total hence it is called product method of estimation. Product Method of estimation is more precise when .
Limits of Bias in Product Estimators:
Let 
Bias 


Now  and .




Limits of Bias:
Since .
When  is very large  is small then product estimators are unbiased i.e. bias is negligible.
Condition under which product estimators are more precise:
Since Product Estimators are biased so mean square error is given by its expected value of .
.
Now .
Ignoring higher order terms:
.
.
If Bias is negligible then .
Product Estimator will be more precise than mean per unit if  or
.
Systematic Sampling: Properties & Derivations
Theorem: If  then sample mean is unbiased estimator of population mean, i.e.  (mean of  systematic sample).
 sample mean.
.
We know that in systematic sampling the probability of selection of each sample from  samples is  and each has same probability.
.
.
 is unbiased estimator of .
Theorem: In systematic sampling show that  where  is intra-class correlation coefficient between pairs of units in systematic sample.
Proof:
 --- (1)
Now we know that .
.
For intra-class correlation within  samples of size , the sum of cross products is .
.
Substitute into (1):
.
Relative efficiency of Systematic sampling with SRS:
Comparison with SRSWR:
.
.
Systematic sampling is more efficient than SRS if its relative efficiency is more than 1 i.e.,
.
.
This condition is generally met when units are heterogeneous within samples.
Comparison with SRSWOR:
Let .
.
Systematic sampling would be more efficient than SRSWOR if .
.
.
.
Range of  in systematic sampling:
We know that .
 is intra-class correlation coefficient is less than 1. i.e. .
Since variance cannot be negative, .
.
.
Therefore: .
Sampling variance of Estimated mean in systematic sampling:
.  is unbiased estimator of .
 (between sample variance).
.
.
.
Now .
.
.
.
Where  is within sample variance, and  is between sample variance.
Variance of systematic sampling: .
Note: Systematic sampling will be more precise if the units in the systematic samples are heterogeneous (wide spread). i.e. It is more precise if  is small i.e.,  should be minimum and for fixed ,  is maximum. Since a systematic sample of size  is selected systematically from a population of  groups i.e. one element from each group. Therefore for systematic sample to be heterogeneous the  groups into which pop is divided should be homogeneous.
Estimation of  in systematic sampling:
.
 --- (1)
Now .
Substituting in (1) we get:
.
 can be estimated unbiasedly by .
But we cannot estimate  as no two consecutive units can occur in the same sample.
Hence we cannot find unbiased estimator of the variance of the estimated population total.
Circular Systematic Sampling:
In linear systematic sampling the main drawback is the observed sample size differ from required sample size when . Hence sample mean is not unbiased for population mean. To overcome this drawback we use circular systematic sampling given by D.B. Lahiri (1952).
Steps:
Select a random start  from  to  instead of  to .
Select every  unit in the circular order so as to complete the sample of size .
Sample units selected are:
 if 
 if , where .
Example: Let . .
If : units are 1, 5, 9, 13, 17.
If : units are 2, 6, 10, 14, 18.
If : units are 3, 7, 11, 15, 1.
If : units are 4, 8, 12, 16, 2.
Theorem on circular systematic sampling: Sample mean is unbiased estimator of Population mean.
.
Since each population unit occurs exactly  times in the  possible samples:
.
Hence in circular systematic sampling even if  we observed that observed sample size  and sample mean is unbiased estimator of pop mean.
Systematic sampling from a pop with periodic variation:
In many situation the population has got periodic variation.
If family members are arranged according to their age: Father, Mother, Children...
In industrial production the machine may become loose with time and cycles are generated or cycles are generated due to temp.
In systematic sampling with periodic variation its efficiency depends upon the sampling interval, length of variation.
.
Case I: When the sampling intervals are equal or multiple of period of cyclic variation, so all the units of sample are homogeneous. Hence  is small and then  will be large. Low precision.
Case II: When sampling intervals are not equal or is odd multiples of half of the period of cycles. Then sample units are heterogeneous and hence  is large and  will be small and precision will be more.
So for higher precision in systematic sampling with periodic variation the sampling interval is odd multiple of half of the period of cycles.
Systematic Sampling from a pop with linear trends:
When pop has linear trend: .
Pop Mean .
Population variance 
.
Case I: When  units are selected by SRSWR.
.
Case II: When  units are selected by SRSWOR.
.
.
We can see .
Case III: When units are selected by systematic sampling.
where 
.
.
Substitute :
.
.
Similar to the derivation for  above, replacing  with :
.
Comparing the variances:
.
.
Therefore .
And for large , they are in ratio .
The variance of systematic sampling is  times.
Systematic sampling is  times more efficient than SRS when there is a linear trend in the population.
Cluster Sampling
In cluster sampling population is divided into a number of clusters i.e., nearby units form a cluster. The clusters are homogeneous in themselves and heterogeneous from each other.
A sample of cluster is selected using SRS or any other sampling scheme and all the units of the cluster are studied.
e.g. family may be considered as a cluster of persons. Wards may be considered as a cluster of houses.
Clusters may be:
Naturally formed: are of unequal sizes.
Artificially formed: generally of equal sizes.
This sampling is very cheap and less time consuming because we have to approach lesser no. of locations to complete the sample size as compared to SRS.
Since it is not well spread over whole population, hence it is less efficient than SRS. The efficiency of cluster sampling increases with the decrease in cluster size.
Cluster of Equal sizes:
Let us suppose that we have  clusters in population of size .
Let  be the value of  unit in  cluster.
where  is the  cluster mean.

(Note: this represents population variance structure).
Case-I: only one cluster is selected
Theorem: show that cluster mean  is unbiased estimator of population mean.
Proof:






Where 

Case-II: when  units are selected out of  units by SRSWR

Relative efficiency of cluster sampling w.r.t. SRS

Cluster sampling is more efficient than SRS if:



This condition usually not be met as nearby elements form the cluster. Hence  in general.
Cluster sampling in general is not more efficient than SRS.
Range of : We know that  is the correlation coefficient hence . Also 
As variance is +ve:


Range of  is:

Case-III: when  clusters are selected out of .
If  clusters are sampled the sample mean:

Sample mean is unbiased estimator of pop mean.
 is unbiased estimator.
Variance of the estimator:

Selection of  cluster means  units are selected out of  units.
If  units are selected out of  units by SRSWR:

Relative efficiency of cluster sampling when  clusters are selected:

Case-IV: when  clusters are selected by SRSWOR
And if  units are selected out of  units by SRSWOR:




Since , relative efficiency of cluster sampling when  clusters are sampled by SRSWOR is higher as compared to the case when they are sampled by SRSWR.
Cost function of cluster sampling
Let  be the overhead cost.,  be the cost of survey of one cluster of size  and  be the cost per unit of survey. Then the cost function  is given by
If various costs are given then
gives the no. of cluster that can be studied when various costs are given.
Optimum Number of clusters
In cluster sampling for fixed sample size, as the number of cluster increases precision of cluster sampling increases. On the other hand if cluster size increases the cost also increases.
The optimum cluster size is one which:
Minimize variance for a fixed cost.
Minimize costs for fixed precision or variance.
In general if  clusters are sampled out of  then:

where 
And when  is large as compared to :
Then 
Substitute the value 



Plot a graph between  and the expression between square brackets. The curve attains a minimum value that gives optimum value of  at which variance is minimum at fixed cost.
Note: In cluster sampling: When clusters are selected by SRSWR: 

When clusters are selected by SRSWOR:

Where  (between cluster variance).
Unbiased estimators:
 for SRSWR.
 if clusters are sampled by SRSWOR.
Where 

Clusters with varying sizes:
Naturally formed clusters are of unequal sizes e.g. number of children per family, houses per street, number of flowers per plants and number of village in a block etc.
Let  be the sizes of  clusters.
Let  be the average cluster size.
Let  be the value of  unit in  cluster. , .
If  clusters are selected out of  by SRSWR or WOR:

is unbiased estimate of population mean. Hence  must be known.
And  when clusters are selected by SRSWR.
 when clusters are sampled by SRSWOR.
where 


And unbiased estimate of variances are:
 when clusters are sampled by SRSWR.
 when clusters are sampled by SRSWOR.
where .
Multi Stage Sampling (Sub Sampling / Nested Sampling)
In cluster sampling, all the units of a sampled cluster are studied and cluster sampling is cheaper and less time consuming than SRS, also less efficient than SRS.
If instead of studying all the units of a sampled cluster we select only few units of all the clusters then such sampling scheme is called as two stage sampling.
Two stage sampling is a compromise between cluster and SRS. Two stage sampling is more efficient than cluster but less efficient than SRS. Two stage sampling is cheaper and less time consuming than SRS and costly and more time consuming than cluster sampling.
Example: Suppose we want to study 50 families in a street. Suppose we have 40 streets and in each street there are 30 houses.
No of p.s.u. (streets) . 
No of s.s.u. (houses per street) .
Out of 40 streets 10 streets are selected i.e. .
Select 5 houses from each selected street i.e. .
Total no of houses selected out of  is .
By decreasing  we can give more and more representation to the pop and thus increase the efficiency.
Two stage sampling can further be extended to three stage or multi stage, where samples are selected at two stages or multi stages.
Two Stage sampling with equal size of p.s.u.
Let us suppose that there are  p.s.u. each of size . Therefore total no of units (s.s.u.) in population = .
Let  be the value of  unit in  p.s.u. , .
Pop Mean .
Let  p.s.u. out of  are selected with SRSWOR and  s.s.u. are selected from each sample p.s.u.
Total number of units sampled .
Let  be the value of  s.s.u. in  p.s.u. sampled.


 is the  p.s.u. sampled.
In two stage sampling  is unbiased estimator of .
In two stage sampling if units are selected by SRSWOR, the variance of sample mean is:

where .
.
Special cases:
If  is large as compared to :

If  and  are both large as compared to  and :

The unbiased estimator of variance of mean:

where 
and  where .
Comparison of two stage sampling with SRS and cluster:
Case-I: Two stage sampling
In two stage sampling  p.s.u. are selected out of  and  s.s.u. are selected out of  for each  p.s.u.
Total s.s.u. selected  out of .

Case-II: SRS
If  units are selected out of  by SRSWR:

Case-III: Cluster sampling
Using cluster sampling where  clusters of size  are selected (if sample size equivalent):

Since  and  is +ve, 

Hence two stage sampling is a compromise between cluster and SRS from variance and precision point of view.
Three-Stage Sampling
 p.s.u.  p.s.u.
 s.s.u.  s.s.u.
 t.s.u.  t.s.u.
Total number of t.s.u.  out of .
 be the value of  t.s.u. in  s.s.u. of  p.s.u. in the pop.
Pop Mean 
Sample Mean .
 be the value of  t.s.u. in  s.s.u. of  p.s.u. of the sample.



Where  (variance between p.s.u.).
,  (variance of  p.s.u.).
, 
If  and  are very large as compared to  then:

Unbiased estimator of :

Where 
, where .
, where .
Cost function:
Let  be the overhead cost.
 be the cost of survey per p.s.u.
 be the cost of survey per s.s.u.
 is the cost function of two stage sampling.
Estimation of Ratio
Sometimes instead of estimating population mean, we are interested in estimating the ratio of two population or ratio of two pop totals.
e.g.
Sex Ratio = .
Per capita Income = .
Per capita consumption of milk = .
Let  be the value of pop units for variable .
Let  be the value of pop units for variable .
Ratio of pop total .
Ratio of pop mean .
Let  be the value of sample units for variable .
Let  be the value of sample units for variable .
Ratio of sample mean .
 is biased estimator of pop ratio .
.
When  is large then  in denominator can be replaced by :
.
For large ,  is unbiased estimator of pop ratio.
.
Proof: We know that .
Let , . .
.
In SRSWOR: .
.
Now .
.
.
Unbiased estimator of  is  where .
Ratio Estimator:
In ratio estimation we make use of auxiliary variable  along with the variable  and make use of the correlation between  and .
We can improve the traditional estimate of  i.e. instead of using  as an estimator for  we use  as the estimator of pop mean. Where  is the pop mean for variable  and must be known.
Ratio estimators are in general biased but more precise.
.
.
 (1st form).
 (2nd form).
Where .
So .
.
3rd form:
.
Unbiased estimator of  is .
Condition under which Ratio estimator is more precise than mean per unit of SRS:
In Ratio method of estimation we know that:
.
And in SRSWOR .
Ratio estimator will more precise than SRSWOR if .
.
.
.
Hence Ratio estimator are more precise than SRS if .
In particular when  then  which is a contradiction. Hence when coefficient of variation of a variable  exceeds twice the coefficient of variation of variable , then in the situation Ratio estimator is less precise and should not be used.
In general,  are some past frame of , so  hold approximately. So the ratio estimator is more precise than SRS if .
Remarks:
If , then ratio estimators are more precise than SRS.
If  then  which is a contradiction. Hence in this situation ratio estimator are less precise than SRS and should not be used.
When  has some past values of  then . In this situation ratio estimator will be more precise if .
When there is a linear trend in  and  and line of regression passes through origin, then ratio estimator are unbiased.
Ratio estimator are BLUE if:
Line of regression passes through origin and
The variance  about this line is proportional to .

